# CHAPTER 3

## EDUCATION

**DO NOT SKIP THIS SECTION.** Every hour you spend in this preparation section will save you five when you really start building your aircraft.

## GENERAL

In this section you won't build any part of your airplane.
What you will do is learn how to build your airplane the right way.
This construction technique is radically different from anything you've done before (including building boats, surfboards, airplanes, and Go-Karts),
and you should assume there is only one correct way to do it.
We've discovered lots and lots of wrong ways of doing things and have written the plans to keep you from repeating our mistakes.
We insist that you do things our way.
If you have a better idea, suggest it to us.
We'll publish details in the "Canard Pusher."

This section will teach you all of the techniques required to build your airplane, show you what special tools you need and how to use them.
The educational samples that you will build in this section are designed to give you experience and confidence in all of the techniques that you will use in the construction of your airplane.
The steps in the construction of each sample are arranged in sequence (as are the steps in construction of the actual aircraft parts) and you should follow the sequence without skipping any steps.
You will learn the basic glass layup technique used throughout the aircraft,
special corner treatments, foam shaping/cutting, and joining methods.
A summary of these techniques is provided on yellow paper for you to tack up on your shop wall.

## TOOLS

There are certain tools which are necessary to complete the aircraft.
Three lists of tools are provided here.
The first is the absolute bare minimum required, sacrificing efficiency; the second is a recommended list for the best compromise of cost and work efficiency; the third is a list for the "Cadillac" of shops where ease of construction is more important than money.
The uncommon items are stocked by the Long-EZ distributors.

### Basic Required Tools

- Common household butcher knife
- Coping saw
- 1/4" drive socket set
- Small open-end wrenches
- Sandpaper
  - 36-grit carborundum Aloxite Fastcut (50 sheets)
  - 220-grit wet or dry silicon carbide (20 sheets)
  - 320-grit wet or dry silicon carbide (20 sheets)
- Disston Abrader #401c - Tool for carving fiberglass.
- 5/8" conterbore with 1/4" pilot; 10" long shank
- 12" long, 1" dia. drill bit
- Peel-ply
- 2" dia. drum sander (coarse) for 1 1/4" drill
- Coarse rotary file bit for 1/4" drill
- Pliers
- 1" putty knife
- Hacksaw
- Blade and Phillips screwdriver
- Box of single-edge razor blades
- 24" carpenter's level
- Carpenter's square
- Felt marking pens
- 3-ft straightedge
- 200 8-oz paper cups
- 50 3-oz paper cups (wax-free)
- 12-ft decimal steel tape (Stanley #61-112)
- 1/4" drill with #30, #3, #10, 1/4", #3, 15/64", #12, and #21" bits
- #10-32 and 1/4-28 taps
- Roll of gray duct tape
- 1" and 2" paint brushes (100 each)
- 6" plastic or rubber squeegees
- Scissors
- Wire brush
- Pop rivet puller
- Homemade balance for measuring epoxy ratios
- Wall thermometer 50-100 degrees F
- 1/4" hand drill

### Recommended Tools

(the following tools are to be used in addition to the basic tools)

- Dremel-type miniature high-speed hand grinder with saw and router bits
- 6" to 9" disc-type hand sander
- Set of 1/4", 1/2" and 1" chisels (wood)
- Small set of X-Acto knives
- Stipple rollers
- 1/2" dia. 100 degree counter sink (piloted)
- 6" machinist steel ruler
- X-Acto razor saw
- Box of wood tongue depressors to mix epoxy
- 6-ft straightedge
- Cheap hole saw set or fly cutter
- 3/8" variable-speed hand drill
- 12" long drill bits - #10 and 1/4"
- Hand broom/brush
- Large commercial 12" scissors (Will #20W)
- Sabersaw
- Bench-mounted belt sander
- Stanley surform plane
- Square and half round file
- Several 6" C-clamps
- Shop vacuum cleaner
- 10" 18 tooth/inch handsaw (see sketch)
- Approx. 150 lbs of small weights*

\* Weights are used to hold various parts down while epoxy cures.
They're best in 5 to 15-lb pieces.
The items in the photo work great.
We got them for 5¢/lb at a local scrap yard.
Sand-filled milk cartons also work well.
Lead shot bags also work well.

** <INSERT EXAMPLE WEIGHTS IMAGE> **

### For the First Class Shop

(the following tools are to be used in addition to the basic tools)

- Drill press
- 18-inch bandsaw
- Vernier Caliper
- Epoxy ratio pump (Michael Engineering dispenser)
- 90 degree drill adapter
- Air compressor with blow nozzle
- Orbital sander
- 3/8" and 1/2" spotface
- Drill sets #1 - #60 and 1/16 - 1/2 (1/64 inch)

### Occasionally Used Items (can be borrowed)

- Nicopress sleeve tool
- 1 dozen 1/8" Clecos
- Hotwire voltage control

### Homemade Tools

#### Sanding Blocks

These are required in many areas during construction and for finishing.
You may aso use a "soft block,"
which is a block of the blue styrofoam wrapped with sandpaper.

A lot of elbow grease is saved if you replace the sandpaper often.

#### Long Straightedge

This is not absolutely required,
but is quite handy when jigging or checking the straightness of flying surfaces.
It is merely a 6-ft or 8-ft 1x3 or 1x4 piece of lumber that is hand-selected to be "eyeball straight."

You can get it one of two ways:

1. Order it from Aircraft Spruce or Wicks - they plane them perfect from dry lumber.
2. Sort through the lumber (dry fir or redwood) at your local lumber yard until you find one that looks straight when you eyeball it from one end. Mark it and hang it on the wall so it doesn't end up as part of a shelf!

#### Epoxy Balance

Devices which automatically ratio the correct amount of resin and hardener and dispense it with the pull of a lever are available from Long-EZ distributors for approximately $130.
These save time and epoxy.
You can also ratio the epoxy the way we did in building N7EZ and N4EZ by building the following simple balance:
Cut out the 5-step instructions and glue to your balance - don't skip steps!
Follow each step **exactly** every time you mix epoxy.

##### Balance Instructions

Place the following instructions on your balance:

1. Place both empty cups as shown (wet the hardener cup).
2. Adjust ballast weight to level mark.
3. Fill resin cup with desired amount of resin - 1 to 6 oz.
4. Add hardener to hardener cup to balance scale on level mark.
5. Pour the hardener into the resin cup and mix.

# TODO: FINISH EPOXY BALANCE AND HOT WIRE CUTTER

#### Jig Table

You will need a table to jig and build the wings and canard.
It should be at least 11 ft ft by 3 ft.
Any larger than 4 ft by 12 ft will just get in the way.
Use a little care in making a flat, untwisted surface.
The following is a sketch of the one we made and it works fine.
The box design makes it stiff in torsion.
Set it up with the top 35 to 39 inches above the floor.
Don't get carried away with surface finish since you are going to be gluing blocks to it with bondo and chiseling them off several times.

** <INSERT JIG TABLE IMAGE> **

#### MATERIALS

The materials, processes, and terminology used in the construction of your Long-EZ are new to homebuilding.
This section is devoted to familiarizing you with the language, materials, and techniques used in these plans.
This information is basic to the construction of your airplane.
You should study this section and be sure that you understand all of it before continuing.

There are five basic materials that you will be working with:
fiberglass cloth, epoxy, microspheres, flox, and foam. Each material, its properties, and uses will be discussed in detail.
Basic processes using these materials will also be discussed.

