CHAPTER 4 
FUSELAGE BULKHEADS 

Overview - In this chapter you will manufacture the 
six bulkheads that go into your Long-EZ fuselage. Two 
of the bulkheads are your front and rear seat backs, 
another doubles as your instrument panel, and still 
another is the firewall. o.2-inc)., thick, high density􀀁• py·a:,tt.e: is used in the instrument panel and other 
forward bulkheads. Type R-45 PV core (dark blue) is 
used in the seat back bulkheads. Birch plywood is 
used in the firewall bulkhead. You will find that 
there are many short jobs in this chapter with cure 
cycles in between, so you may.want to work on several 
of the bulkheads simultaneously or even do some work 
in following chapters while waiting for a cure. Appro­
ximately 20 man-hours are required for bulkheads. 

STEP 1 - Front seat bulkhead 
lrefer"to chapter 5 to see how the inclined front seat bulkhead fits in the fuselage. Cut a rectangular piece 
of .8"
thick R-45 foam 28.3 long and 23 inches wide. 

Taper and round one end as shown. Cut 2 plies UNO 
and glass the front side and tapered end. Knife trim 
flush with the foam edges all around. 
After cure, flip over, taper and round the other end 
( ,'7" a 1 so) and round the side edges. The one ply BID 
glass skin on the back not only covers the back and 
taper but also folds around the side edges to meet 
the glass on front. Support the bulkhead up about 
l" above the table so the !!/lass edges can hang down 
unobstructed by the table surface. Use a ¼" flex corner all around. After cure, use a finetooth coping saw 
and notch the corners as shown to fit the fuselage 
longerons. 

STEP 2 - The rear seat bulkhead. 
This bulkhead serves as the lumbar support for the passenger and helps support the main gear attactlnent structure. A large hole in its center provides acess to the small baggage area behind the rear seat. Cut 
a .8" thick type R45 block to the dimensions shown. Glass this front face with 2 plies UNO at 45° crossing fiber orientation. Knife trim all around flush with the foam edges. After cure, use a fine-tooth coping saw or knife to taper the top and bottom edges as shown. This allows the bulkhead to fit flush to the center section spar at the top and to the floor at the bottom. See also page 5-.i and page AS. 
Now use a butcher knife, and sanding block to remove the foam at the side edges as shown. This provides 
a strong edge and allows the bulkhead to sit back in the correct position in the fuselage. 
Use your knife to remove foam from the rear down to the front 9lass surface in a 8 11 diameter circle roughly centered ,n the bulkhead. Round all foam edges, stand the bare glass surfaces dull, and glass with'two plys BIDusing 45° fiber orientation. Knife trim all around the edges and cure •• Use a knife or saber saw to remove a 7" diameter glass piece in the center (acc􀀝ss hole to baggage area). Remove a.7" x t. 4" piece 
each lower corner as shown to clear lower fuselage longeron. Cut the holes shown to allow clearance for 

controls, electricals 1 cabin heat􀀥Ai.>o LAN01"1&􀀬 ltE#.c􀀱. · 1 

STEP 3 - The instrument panel and 2 forward bulkheads. "'F'iiTT=size patterns for the instrument panel, F22 and F28 forward bulkheads are shown on pages Al, A2 and A3. These are made from type 250 high density PV foam (dark red), 5 mm thick (.2 inches). Layout the bulkheads on the flat sheet foam. Cut and shape the bulkheads and the doubler. Don't cut your instrument holes until after the panel is glassed on both sides. Lay up 2 plies of BID over the aft face of the pieces. Fiber orientation isn't critical. You can save glass by using strips and over lapping the joints. With The 2 ply layup still wet, press the doubler into position and lay up 2 BID plies locally over,􀀿 • 
. Add a third ply BID to the instrument panel above the 
Leg cutouts. Knife trim and let the lay-
up cure, then flip the pieces over and layup 
2 BID plies on the forward faces (add the third one on upper instrument panel). Add the 5 UNO and 4 BID additional plies local buildups for the canard attachment in the area shown. Knife trim and cure. After a full cure, open your instrument holes with a fly cutter or hole saw. 

STEP Afuff-size 4 - Firewall layout of the plywood and stainless firewall is Lay up shown one on ply page BID A4. over Cut the the a.􀀅1: plywood face. While outline the to layup shape.
is it. plywood, stainless wet, Trim roll can the Cut the cut the Ftill:/(F.Oio 1you ,r1r􀁕.to stainless easily. r,bt􀀐i\c.x the sheet outside Clamp sheet to the size. out contour flat plywood Be of over the caref􀀔l.over 
the stainless on your work bench and drill the 6 pulley (shown bracket on holes pag A4) and notches through for the the plywood, 4 alllllinum 􀁞,l:.tt-􀁡􀁢. extrusions.and  it is stainless. not The permanenetly stainless installed firewall unitl is now after set the aside -fuselage is system assembled. pulley bracket Countersink into thethe · six forward holes face for of the the rudder then plywood. lay up Epoxy one ply the 6 BID over An509-10Rl0 the front screws face in of position,the bond plywwod. to the Fill glass the ply. screw These heads six with screw epoxy heads so they are can covered by will the keep spar them when from the turning fuselage until is the assembled. rudder The pulley epoxy a brackets coping are saw or installed. saber saw to Knife cut trim the and four cure. rectangularUse holes and  the two six square longerons (0.7 x to 0.7) pass holes through in the during plywood  fuselage
to assembly.allow 
