CHAPTER 5 
THE FUSELAGE SIDES 

Overview - In this chapter you will manufacture the sides of your fuselage. To do this, 0.8" thick dark blue 
PV core type 45 foam is cut to size, determining the fuselage profile. 
The inside surfaces are contoured 
(dished out) for fuel gages and for extra room near the front control 
stick. The inside (contoured) surface receives a 2 ply UNO skin and,while 
the layup is wet,the upper rectangular wooden stringers are bonded in position. The lower triangular stringers and 
some local beef-up in the landing 
gear attactnent area are then installed and cured. The area where the center­section spar mates to the fuselage 
is opened and the main gear attactment fittings installed. The outside 
foam surfaces are left bare until 
after assembly of the fuselage is completed in chapter 6. 
STEP 1.- Shaping the foam sides. 
Butt pieces of 0.8" thick dark blue type 45R PV core together to obtain 
two 103" x 21" rectangles laid flat 
on your workbench. Bond the joints with wet micro. Trim or sand one 
103" edge absolutely straight. 
Using thP adjacent drawing your decimal ruler, Cll'\􀀌- carpenter's 1square as shown, measure and mark the 12 dimensions 
that determine the curve of the fuselage bottom Refer also to pages AS, A7, 
and AS to check the shape of the 
curve. Draw this curve on the foam with a ball-pointf)£"1 o􀀬 felt marker. Cut along this line and use this 
as a pattern to make the other fuselage side. 

Layout the positions of the four interior bulkheads. Use drawing AS (full size) to layout the aft HAt bulkhead and spar cutout. 

Now, layout the circular depression 
shown, in the right side only (inside surface}. The depression gives some extra room inside at the control 
stick area. Using 36-grit sandpaper, dish out this area about O.li" deep with smooth edges. 
Refer to the dimensions for the fuel sight gauge depressions. Refer also to Chapter 7 and Chapter 21 to see 
the function of these. Note how 
the depression is tilted to face 
the pilot. All foam is later removed in this areaso the fuel can be viewed through the translucent glass skins. After carving, apply a 2½" strip 
of shiny-surface grey tape (duct 
tape} to this area so the layup does not bond to the foam. 

STEP􀁫 -Fitting the longerons and making the 
inside layup. 
This step should take you about three to four 
hours. An assistant is nice for the layup but 
not absolutely necessary. Refer to the full­
scale drawing on page AS and cut your rectangular 
1.0 x 0.7 wood longeron material to lengt􀀃as 
shown; Cut UNO cloth and lay up 2 crossing plies 
over the contoured foam as shown. This is the 
inside of the fuselage. Be sure you are making 
a left and a right side. Oo 􀁲 1.1c;.e """-"o sl""􀁽• 􀁿 c."'-•t' 3, .;.,"' 􀂉􀂊 .q5tc t>.V, +oAM• 
With both plies wet out and squeeged well, apply 
wet flax to the 103.5" wood longeron mating surfaces and position on the fuselage sides. Install, 
with wet flax, the .7 x .􀂓 wood stiffeners under 
the longerons. Weight them into position for 
cure. Peel-ply the bottom edge. Refer to the 
full-size drawing on page AS and carefully position and flax in place the other two small longerons. 
Knife trim skin to the foam edge all around. 
Allow to cure. After cure, radius the edge of 11--e tor longeron and glass the 3 ply Vl.)C>. Al-l() 1. "'Pl.."i 'BID ,._􀂩\"f>S 
STEP 3 -Installation of the lower triangular 
Longerons. 

This step should take about one hour. Remove
peel ply along the bottom edges of the fuselage
sides. Fit the triangular longeron to the lower  \ edge foam curvature by holding it in position 
with nails as shown in the photo. Don't try 
to drive the nails with a hanmer; drill a hole 
for them so you can shove them in by hand. Notch 
the longerons with saw cuts every 2 inches at 
the aft end so they will more easily bend to
the correct curvature. The longerons are installed/;'\/ with wet flox. \>J," o􀀌 uc.eu H0>t-

