CHAPTER 13. 

NOSE AND NOSE GEAR 

Overview - In this chapter, you will assemble a box consisting of two slabs of glass/foam/glass sandwich 
and nose gear hardware (wonn drive system). The 
nose gear strut is mounted in this box, then the assembly and the nose bulkhead are installed on the fuselage. 
The nose floor foam pieces and side pieces are installed and glassed inside. The nose wheel and pivot assembly 
is then installed. The pitot-static plumbing and rudder pedals are installed. The top foam piece is then installed. The outside is carved to shape and then glassed. A 
door is laid up onto the top of the nose. The top 
piece is then removed to fabricate the door flanges. 
The SC strut cover and NB nose gear box is also installed. The following prefab parts used in this chapter are available from distributor: NGl-L fiberglass strut, 
SC fiberglass nose gear strut cover, NB fiberglass 
box, three castings - NG-6, NG15A, and NG16 (the castings are available in either the as-cast state, or machined 
in Tfll.􀀉􀀊-to-instal l condition), NG14 spacers (2 required), 
NGlOA push rod,t-tE,.J ,N6"1 ,'>£.C! NG23 bushings (2 required), NG22 bushings (2 required),Nbl7 1 tube, NG21 ring, CS13 
spacers (4 required) all wonn-drive/crank components,􀀛􀀜s, and two rudder pedals. The entire lower assembly from NG15Acasting down, including friction damper, axle, 
wheel, tire, etc. (ready to bolt to the strut), is 
also available as well as the entire assembled worm 
drive assembly. The NGlOA pushrod with two NG9's 
pressed in is available as an assembly. 
Caution: Do not use the NGl fiberglass strut manufactured for VariEze aircraft. It is 1" too short and only 
about 2/3 the strength of NGl-L 

STEP 1 - Fabricating the metal parts and BID reinforcement on strut.

The majority of work in this step can be eliminated 
by purchasing the prefabricated parts. Refer to the accompanying drawings and build/buy the following components: The worm drive system (see drawings and 
parts lists). 
NG4 and NG3 brackets - see drawings 
NGB plates - see drawings 
NG6/NG23/NG7/NG5 - This is the upper attachment 
for the nose gear strut - see drawing 
Lower pivot/ fork/friction damper/axle/wheel 

assembly - see drawing. (this assembly can be purchased complete, without door). The friction damper should be tightened enough so that the wheel will pivot when a side load of about 5 pounds is applied at the axle. 

Rudder pedals - Refer to the drawing - be sure to make one left and one right. 

Operation of Worm-drive Nosegear - The sketches show the operation of the system. The NGSO arms travel 
156􀁴, striking the NG14 spacers at each end of travel. It is over-center in the down position, thus, landing loads are not applied to the worm gear. The pilot's crank uses 10.8 turns for full travel, taking five 
to seven seconds. 
You can extend the gear at 140 mph, however, the crank is hard to turn above 130. When we first installed this system, 1􀀮e used it to lower the nose with the pilot in the airplane. This was successfull until 
one time when the crank slipped, turned fast, then caught. The inertial loads failed the cast iron worm gear. It is possible that "cranking down" on the ground would be acceptable with the steel gear shown, but this is not reconrnended. 
Check the assembly for freedom from binding before installation. It does not (nor should not) spin freely, just be sure it does not bind up enough to make the crank hard to turn. If it binds, loosen the NG57 blocks and shim as required. The NG53 and NG58 gears must 
be accurately positioned to avoid binding. Use a gear lubricant on NG53 and NG60. Note that four NA960-816 washers are used to position NG58. One at the roll pin end and three at the other end. ------+--tTtt-

STEP 2 
FABRICATION AND ASSEMBLY OF THE HIGH DENSITY FOAM PLATES (NGJO)

This step should take about four hours, 
not counting cure. Use the full-sizecut drawing out on the oupage tline AE,J1"7 of as the a plates pattern andto  
to accurately mark five holes (one􀀇 
the gear forward pivot and four at the 
NG1J guide). Follow the double tick marks (TY) on the full-size drawing to obtain the correct outline of NGJO. 
Lay the NGJO pieces on your table 
with the inside surfaces up and 
lay up four plies BID (fiber ori-
entation optional). Knife trim around 
all edges. When cured, place both NGJO plates together and drill pilot holes 
at the five locations previously identi­fied. Lay the plates on the table with the fiberglass sides down. Remove all foam down to the fiberglass and round
the edges in the areas shown. A knife, dremel and coarse sandpaper are reQuired. Cut the BID pads shown: lay up
into the depressions and lay up a 4-ply skin over the entire surface ( outboard surface of NGJO). C..to."''I' or-􀁒e.-gi.t Q. blod< 0" i,"'-e C(.1-r-o c.or􀁴cl" 􀁧,

After cure, open the front pivot hole to 5/16" and the other four holes to 1/4" -use very light drill pressure and a hard wood block as dz:ill backup, and using NG-51 as a drill guide.

How, round up the following parts and hardware: NGJO plates, NG6 casting with NG2J bushings and NG? spacer, NG8 discs, AN5...!\IA bolt, two AN970-5 wide 
area washers, ANJ65-524 nut, eight AN509- 10Rl'f screws, eight AN960-10 washers, eight MS21042-J nuts, two NG51 ?LAT􀂙S 
. two NG14 spacers, 
two AN4-'!IA bolts, Tlh·u AN4-tOA bolts, 
eight AN970-4 wide area washers, six 
MS21042-4 nuts. Bolt everything together as shown, applying wet flox on ulia 
Uo»􀅝rt t't. 111\.Cl"t.4"!. T..._􀅨 ftb<"1L4..􀃋'o. 

Check that the assembly is square all around.

Now, bolt the NGl fiberglass strut and f'G5 plate to NG6 with four AN509-
10R<.8 screws. The strut is installed 
wet with flox. Check to be sure it is 
aligned straight (centered between NGJO plates when retracted). Refer to the full­size drawing on page AG for strut posi­tion. 

) Refer and to to the full-size drawing (page
A􀁏 the sketches for installation of the NG4 and NGJ brackets on the strut. The brackets are manufactured to a loose fit on the strut, dry BID until NG3 fits snug (2 to J
plies). Remove NG3, sand the strut,  lay􀁕P 􀁗he BID wet and coar the inside of NG3  with wet flox. Install
NG4 and NGJ. Remove excess flox.  Clamp as shown until cured, then remove the
clamps, drill the hole up to 1/4"  diameter and install the 1/4" bolt, spacer washers, and RE4M6 rod end. Note that the spacer  
washers can be shifted from o􀁜e-side of the rod end to the other, to correct for any strut misalignment (if the strut is a little off-center, the rod ene can 
still be centered. 

STEP J 
INSTALLATION OF ASSEMBLY ON THE FUSELAGE 

This step should take only an hour or two. Cut out the NG)l disc and glass one face with one ply BID (use the full-size pat­tern shown). While it's still wet, in­stall on the front of NGJO plates with 
flox and lay up glass tapes as 
shown. This job is easier if the tapes are wet out on a piece of paper then 
lifted and stippled into place. Mount 
the assembly to F22 with flox and BID 
tapes as shown. It can be held in place during cure with nails -drill a small 
hole for the nails to avoid splitting 
the foam. I:t.>S'l'Atl F-b I A5 􀀯 HOW#J. 

STEP 4 
NOSE FLOOR, SIDES, AND RUDDER PEDALS 

This step involves about seven hours work. Don't try to support the airplane on the nose gear now; it doesn't attain its strength and stiffness until step9 is completed. 
Drill a #10 hole through the NGJO plates at the position shown for the rud­der pedal pivot bolt (see full-size drawing, page 􀅎 7 ) . Round up your butch­er knife and sorue 2" thick green urethane  'i,cC.TlO.J f\·I\ foam and carve the floor blocks shown.

Note that they are dished out on their in­
board edges to allow access to the screws at the nose gear pivot. These blocks 
are not shown on the full-size drawing 
(page Pi<:, ) • 
Now, carve the rudder pedal pivot 
foam blocks and mount the nut plates on 
the.063 aluminum pieces, usi􀁈 AN470ADJ-3 _ rivets. Screw an ANJ bolt into the nut-

plate, to keep epoxy out of the threads, 
then .5MIN the plate and nutplate to the 
foam block as shown - when cured, remove 
the bolt, 

Fit the floor blocks to the fuselage, as shown, Refer to the full-size pattern of NGJl bulkhead for placement at the front. The top of the floor piece should be even with the floor, at the F22 bulk- head. Install them with wet micro and glass . with two plies BID, lapping 1" up onto NG JO , NG Jl , and onto the floor aft of F22, Lay up an additional ply on the aft J" of the floor to protect it from damage from the pilo􀆆s heels. Knife trim the glass along the outboard sides. 
Refer to the sketch and to the full­size drawing on page A'iP..'l to carve the side pieces from 2" thick green urethane foam. While the sketch provides a size reference, it is easier to take an over­size 2" thick block to your airplane 
and slice away, until the block fits in place. (I once asked a sculpture how 
he carved a beautiful rock figure of 
an elephant, He said, "It's easy, you just take a block of granite and chip away everything that doesn't look like 
an elephant,") Again, the block doesn't have to fit perfectly; gaps can be filled with dry micro at assembly. Hold the side piece into position while fitting 
th'}-􀀁􀀂-x."'t rudder pe􀃴al pivot blocks as shown.

Fit the floor blocks to the fuselage, as shown, Refer to the full-size pattern of NGJl bulkhead for placement at the front. The top of the floor piece should be even with the floor, at the F22 bulk- head. Install them with wet micro and glass . with two plies BID, lapping 1" up onto NG JO , NG Jl , and onto the floor aft of F22, Lay up an additional ply on the aft J" of the floor to protect it from damage from the pilo􀆆s heels. Knife trim the glass along the outboard sides. 
Refer to the sketch and to the full­size drawing on page A'iP..'l to carve the side pieces from 2" thick green urethane foam. While the sketch provides a size reference, it is easier to take an over­size 2" thick block to your airplane 
and slice away, until the block fits in place. (I once asked a sculpture how 
he carved a beautiful rock figure of 
an elephant, He said, "It's easy, you just take a block of granite and chip away everything that doesn't look like 
an elephant,") Again, the block doesn't have to fit perfectly; gaps can be filled with dry micro at assembly. Hold the side piece into position while fitting 
th'}-􀀁􀀂-x."'t rudder pe􀃴al pivot blocks as shown.

Mount a small tab on the lower through-bolt as shown and hook a light spring to the rudder pedal tab as shown. This should not be a strong spring; it's only function is to keep the pedal from falling back under its own weight. 

STEP 5 COMPLETION OF NOSE GEAR 

This step involves mounting the lower nose gear assembly, fitting the strut to the bottom of the fuselage, fitting the nose gear box and strut cover, and riggir:gthe retraction/extension system. If all goes well, it should take- -YOU- only about three hours. Trim the end of the NG1Lstrut so that it nests into NG15Aat the correct distance from the NG6 pivot block as shown. 􀀁E 􀀅􀀆ct iO􀀉 A-1\ OtJ 

the assembly, sand the bonding surfaces and replace wet with flox. The 􀀖oor 
'A􀁜 S􀁝-/0 􀁠2."'\ 􀁣lt£􀁥S Al:i,c M􀁩.:11T the forward gear door. The aft gear door should 
not be mounted at this time. 
Now, flip the fuselage upside down, take your dremel or razor saw and remove the bottom fuselage skin below the strut, from F22,aft to the nose wheel cutout. Remove enough foam so that the strut will retract to the flush position shown on 
the full-size drawing (page􀁳 7 ) • 
The forward door should fit up against 
the skin; bend it, if necessary. Now, find your SC. fiberglass strut cover. 
This is a prefab part that seals the void between the nose gear forward pivot and F22. Note the c:.u,cvT in the top 
of SC. This area needs to be removed 
(dremel or coping saw) to allow the NGlO push rod to pass through. Fit in position as shown in the sketch and trim the outer edges as required. Check its fit to the strut. Sand bonding surfaces and bond in place with wet flox. Use 
two plies BID to glass over all bare foam in the wheel well/strut notch area aft of SC. Use a small flox corner 
at the bottom skin edge. 
After checking for sufficient clear­ance to the tire, mount the NB_ fiber­glass nose gear box (wet flox with 1-ply BID tap! inside) • The flanges on NB should fit flush to the fuselage floor, The aft face seals against the instru­ment panel bulkhead. Carve a small scrap of plexiglass off the edge flange of your canopy and fit it to the opening in the instrument panel bulkhead, This can 
be bonded in place with silicone. This 
"window" allows the pilot to see the posi­tion of the nose gear. 
Now, mount the aft nose gear door, using three AN525-1ORIO screws ( tap holes into the NG16 casting). Note that the nose wheel well is not completely covered by doors. The drag of the open hole can be reduced by rounding the aft edge of the hole. This is done by installing a rounded foam block to the sharp edge as shown. 
The rounded aft corner assures that any air flow through the wheel well comes out smooth and attached, rather than turbulent. With the aft edge rounded, the open hole causes less than 1/2-mph drag. 

Rigging the nose gear. 
Refer to page 13-2 for hardware used on the retraction mechanism. Install the universal, NG61 torque 
tube and crank on the instrument panel. Crank 
the mechanism to the fully retracted position. 
This is when the NGSO arms stike the upper NG14 spacer. 
Drill the #12 hole in the universal and NG61 
for the AN3-6A bolt, with the crank in the best position to not block an instrument or hit the 
p il at' s leg. 

Hold the nose gear in the retracted position. 
Then adjust one or both of the rod ends on the NGlOA pushrod.to fit between NG3 and NGSO. Then, shorten NGlOA by one turn of a rod end. This provides a good snub of the gear in the up pcsition. Extend the gear and check for the correct down position (see page 13-1) ie. lower pivot vertical or canted bottom-forward up to 5° . 
To install a gear-up warning,mount 
the micro switch so it is activated by NGSO or 
NG9 in its last 1/10 inch motion to the down 
stop. See chapter 22 for electrical wiring 􀀧 4􀀁 

The gear is not intended to be used to raise or lower thegear on the ground with weight on the nose. Refer to Owners Manual for nonnal operation of the nose gear. 

1-)()􀂤, Go 1'b C.1-\A􀂬 2.2.. Al-lo 
,,-,,-s."'t7\-LL Tt\t e1􀀽􀀾􀀿-eow1v 
.tJiC.􀂱Sv.>l1"C.􀂶 􀂷o􀂹 VJA􀂼􀂽i􀂿t; S VS.'lcN• 

STEP 6 
PLUMBING THE PITOT AND STATIC SYSTEM 
If this step takes you more than about 
an hour, you must have bought this pro­
ject from someone else! 
Round up your soft aluminum ( sos􀂇 -0) 1/4"-dia tubing and cut one piece 6" 
long and one piece 38" long. Refer to the full-size drawing on page Alo , and drill a 1/4" hole in l'GJ1 bulkhead. Route 
the long piece of tubing aft, A􀀄ou..c.the 
battery area and through a hole in F22, 01\ <i about 3" under the canard. Stack some 
over-size blocks of green urethane foam 
on over the pitot tube and bond to the 
NGJ1 bulkhead with dry micro or ,5MIN. 
Use epoxy only below the final contour, 
to later simplify carving the shape. 
These blocks will later be carved to shape when the entire nose is carvei, Insert 
a plug into the pi tot tube to p􀂛otect it from contamination. 
The static port is located in the 
left fuselage side, 8" forward of the 
instrument panel and 10" below the top 

of position tl'etop on the longerons inside of (W,L,13). the Mark fuselage that side , s􀂫u. ir '_ panel. Now, refer to the sketch for installation  of the static line. 
After installing the airspeed in­dicator and altimeter, hook up the pitot/ static system using the hardware shown, Add one adapter and one tee. to the static l_ine if using a rate-of-cliab indicator. 

STEP 7 -TOP FOAM BLOCK. 
Refer to the sketch, page A6, and A?. Cut the top block from 2" thick green urethane foam. This 
is temporarily installed now. Weight it in place and bond to the side pieces and NG31 with a few 
dabs of 5 minute or epoxy. 

STEP 8 
CARVING AND GIASSING THE OUTSIDE OF THE NOSE 
Due to the excellent carvability of ure­
thane foam, your boxy/ugly/blocky nose 
section will look sleek and smooth and 
have a tough fiberglass skin in only 
about five hours work. You will need 
some help in turning the fuselage. Re­
tract the gear for this step. '1:he best 
tools for carving are the butcher knife 
{sharp), the surfoam file, the long 
sanding block and chunks of urethane, in 
that order. Fair the sides and bottom 
in tangent to the glassed fuselage and 
the -􀃨'-cover. Carve down into the NGJ1 
bulkhead all around -this is a good 
reference for symmetry. Turn the :fuselage upside down when carving the bottom. 
Believe it or not, you will find that it 
is VariEze to carve it to a ·pleasing 
shape using only the eye ball and without need for templates. SEE A􀃱􀃲 A'1. 
Fit and bond with .5MIN, a few small 
urethane blocks around the gaps at the 
front of the nose strut. see A. 6 
Now, glass the nose with two plies 
BID lapping about 1" onto .5C. , 
the fuselage sides, and bottom. This 
glassing job is easy if you use several 
small pieces and overlap them. Turn the fuselage upside down or on its side as 

STEP 8 
CARVING AND GIASSING THE OUTSIDE OF THE NOSE 
Due to the excellent carvability of ure­
thane foam, your boxy/ugly/blocky nose 
section will look sleek and smooth and 
have a tough fiberglass skin in only 
about five hours work. You will need 
some help in turning the fuselage. Re­
tract the gear for this step. '1:he best 
tools for carving are the butcher knife 
{sharp), the surfoam file, the long 
sanding block and chunks of urethane, in 
that order. Fair the sides and bottom 
in tangent to the glassed fuselage and 
the -􀃨'-cover. Carve down into the NGJ1 
bulkhead all around -this is a good 
reference for symmetry. Turn the :fuselage upside down when carving the bottom. 
Believe it or not, you will find that it 
is VariEze to carve it to a ·pleasing 
shape using only the eye ball and without need for templates. SEE A􀃱􀃲 A'1. 
Fit and bond with .5MIN, a few small 
urethane blocks around the gaps at the 
front of the nose strut. see A. 6 
Now, glass the nose with two plies 
BID lapping about 1" onto .5C. , 
the fuselage sides, and bottom. This 
glassing job is easy if you use several 
small pieces and overlap them. Turn the fuselage upside down or on its side as 
Tke B\l:) with ,C\S• +1b<'° oRt£"Al"""'tiokJ. 

STEP 9 - Nose Door. 
In this step you will install the large battery-
access door in the nose top. This door a 1 so a 11 ows 
canard removal and landing gear inspection. 
Layout the door with a felt tip pen on the top as shown. Tape a piece of thin plastic film (saran wrap) over 
this area for a release then layup􀀑 plies BID lapping over the door marks. This is your door. When cured, 
remove it and trim to size. Now, measure in 0.7" all 
around, for a flange,then cut the hole in the top of 
the nose along this inner mark. 
Using a razor saw cut off the entir􀀔􀀕tse piece. Cut just aft of NG31 and along the top of the side blocks. Turn the piece upside down and mark where it touches 
the NG30 top edges and the top of F6. Referring to 
the sketches, remove foam to make a bare-glass 0.7" 
flange around the door cutout and a smooth taper of 
the foam with rounded edges. Now, layup 1 ply BID 
over the entire inside of the block. Add 2 more plies locally on the flanges to stiffen them. While its 
still wet, stack flox on the sides, NG30, F6 and NG31, then weight or tape the top block back into place. 
Reach in from the canard cutout and wipe off excess 
flox. 

After cure layup a l" strip of 1 ply BID over the edges where the top block was cut from NG31 and the sides. 
Install ten equally-spaced screws (with nutplates inside) along the door edges. Use AN509-8R8 screws (flush 
#8) and Kl000-08 nutplates. seEI". 
Now, refer to section VI - landing brake, page 2 for 
a neat method to fair your door in flush at the edges.

