CHAPTER•􀀟- CENTERSECTION SPAR. 

Overview. In this chapter you will build the 
center box spar which joins the wings to the fuselage. You first build an accurate jig, from particle-
board then you asseni>le a box from¼" pvc foam 
and l" urethane foam slab. It is glassed on the inside, and bulkheads are installed. The center section box is removed from the jig, the outside 
is contoured and carved to accept the spar caps, 
metal inserts are installed at wing attach points, 
a Bi-directional glass shearweb is layed up, the 
uni-directional spar caps are layed up, then the external bi-directional shear web is layed up. Additional metal and glass is installed at the 
wing attach areas, and an oval-shaped panel is 
removed for access to the· baggage area inside. 
The center-section spar is the heart of your wing structure and in order to have a straight and true wing, follow all steps carefully and have patience. Before going onto Step I, study pagel1-5 very closely until you really have a good understanding of what 
the centersection spar looks like. Note that the 
top of the spar is flJt: that it sweeps aft and 
that the bottom has positive dihedral in order 
that fuel will run inboard. If in doubt about 
exactly how things fit together, study the fullsize section drawings (Section A-A, B-B,C-C,D-D, and 
E-E).
STEP 1. In this step you will make the particle 
-board jig in which you will assemble your centersection spar. Accuracy here is very important so don't
rush! Particle-board is available at your local
lumber yard. Bondo is handy to bond the pieces together, since it provides adequate strength and 
5 minute cure. You will cut a strip of 3/4" thick particle-board x 12½" wide. This needs to be 112.92" long. You can join it in the center or anywhere
you like. Now carefully and as accurately as you
can, layout the top view outline of the spar on
this 12½" x 112.92" strip of Rarticle-board 
{part# D) as shown on pagel􀀴-b. To do this
determine the centerline, layout the 56.46 & 23" dimensions, measure down the 5.04 dimensions, mark 
a point and draw the diagonal. Then layout the
90° angle to the diagonal and measure the 6.05 
to the shelf line. Accurately mark the shelf line 
full span. Cut the diagonal top edge down to the shape shown. Now draw a straight line on the top_ 
of your work bench at least 112.92" 
long and stand 􀀅'f''t 'D' up at 90° to your table 
top and carefully aligned along the straight line. Bondo it firmly to the table top. If it warps, support it straight with more lumber ...... Cut out parts, A,B, and C. together with parts E,F, and G. Bonda parts E,F, and G into position against parts D, such that when you bondo the "shelf" parts A,B, and C, to the upright part D, they fit exactly on the shelf line. Carefully check that the angle between shelf and upright is 90° . Caution! The 
spar is mounted aft face down in ji_g. But all statements 1 ike "top, foward etc, relate to how 
it is mounted in your completed aircraft. 

STEP 2. Cut out all foam parts for the center section spar, pageJ􀁠-7- Micro .joints are ok if your pieces are too small. Carve or sand the local clearance depressions in the urethane pieces at 
the outboard wing attach points as shown below. 

Lay the 6mm pvc foam aft face {part # CSI) down on shelf 'ABC' (use grey tape or saran wrap on the jig for a release where applicable to keep the spar from bonding to the jig). Glue the three pieces together with micro. (butt joints). Note that the 6" v!ide urethane parts are too wide. 

Set them up against the J1g as shown on top of CSI and sand to flush with the jig - do this for all six urethane pieces. This assures correct spar width. Now micro the urethane foam {spar top) (part 􀁇S2) to part# CS! against the jig upright (part D). Hold in place with grey tape. 

P􀁊rt #CS2 will also have two micro'd butt joints. Next micro urethane foam (spar bottom) {part# 
CS3) into position along the edge of part #CSl. 
Hold it in position with a few nails, and bondo several l" x l" pine sticks to the fixture and 
up the face of part CS3 as shown. Use as many 
pine sticks and nails as it takes to hold CS3 aligned on the edge of CSL The urethane w.ilJ easily bend 
at the small angle change at B.L.9. Fit and bond with micro the end bulkheads CS5 & 8. They must 
fit flush with your jig all around and stick up 
¼" above the edge of the jig top. Nail to urethane pieces. 

STEP 3. Lay the three pieces of 6,mm pvc foam 
that make up part #CS4 {spar forward face), down 
on your table with the spar inside face up. Lay 
up one ply of BID at 45° to the longest edge on 
each piece (layup 1). Peel ply l" along all edges 
and allow to cure. Knife trim at the appropriate time. 
STEP 4. Fabricate all LWA metal pieces. Remove 
any grease or dirt and sand dull with 100-grit. 
They must be clean and dull on installation. Pull 
all nails out of the spar box interior. Fit (don't bond) interior bulkheads CS6 and CS7, trimTf neccessary to allow for 1 ply of BID. They fit flush with 
edges of top and bottom pieces. The remaining 
layups of this entire step should be done in one 
layup without curing inbetween. Prepare all the 
foam surfaces inside the spar box with slurry and 
apply layup 2, - one ply of BID at 45° orientaion 
to all three faces, including the end bulkheads. Overlap where needed. Bulkheads CS6, CS7 are now installed, using wet micro. These are perpendicular 
to aft face, 27" from center line. Nails through 
the urethane blocks will hold them. Be carefull 
not to disturb the ply of BID already in place. 
Now, apply the local reinforcements {lay􀁶p 3) at 
the inboard wing attach hard point areas. (see 
section B-B and H-H). The first ply of BID is 
layed up over the interior bulkheads (both sides) 

and lapped onto the top, bottom and aft faces of 
the spar box, l" e cept where the attach points will be, where it 1aps 5". Now layup three pl i􀀃s 
of UNO 4" wide over the inboard wing attach hard point areas as shown. (lapping onto top and aft face). The first is 10" long, nsion. second 8 third 

6WAl fibers al1111inllll ruplates into position from center) centered and over la
" yup 
1 the ply attach of BID points lapping ce (BL25-25saran over wrap WAl's over the approximately metal l" all around. Plalb. w
WAl and weight in position with about 5 eight. This removes  excess epoxy and makes a strong, 
reinforcement.
Now, while layup 2 is still tacky, apply the following reinforcements (layup 4) in the outboard wing attach hard point area. Refer to section C-C, E-E, F-F, and G-G, and the sketch below. As in the inboard reinforcement (layup 3) layup the 1 ply BID over 
the bulkhead lapping 5" inboard, then 3 UNO plies 
4" wide as show, then the metal LWA-1 plates, then 
a final BID over the metal parts that laps onto 
the bulkhead. Weight in place for cure, about 
5 lb on each piece. The UNO pieces are 4" wide 
and 15, 13 and 11" long - fibers oriented along 
long dimension. Layup 4 is now complete. 
Note: Be sure the raduis on the LWA-1 is in the corner as shown on the section views. 

STEP 5. Now bond the three forward face pieces Tnplace with wet micro to complete the box. Butt together - it is not required to lap glass across this internal joint. After a complete cure (2-
3 days), remove your spar from the jig and place 
it forward face down on your work table. Refer 
to the adjacent drawing. Layout the points shown 
as dimensioned on the aft face (.50, .40, .55, 
.16 and .39) and connect with straight lines. Using a razor saw or rigid sharp knife, cut along the lines through the aft face (CSl) and into the urethane. Break off the sliver of foam and discard. Refer to sections A-A, B-B, C-C, D-D to familiarize yourself with the size and shape of the spar cap troughs. 

Cutout and mount on template board, the eight spar cap troughs templates shown on page All. Using these and a 36-grit hard-block sanding block, carve the top and bottom troughs and contour the topside to size. These troughs must be straight and at 
the correct depth. Note that the three inch wide troughs follow the aft face and make a turn at 
Bl23. Note that the top of the spar box is flat 
out to BL25, and tapers down to the aft, starting 
at BL25. The bottom is flat full span(􀀤ye-A􀀸. 
Using a saw, file and or hard block, cut the 
½" x l" angle on both top and bottom edges full 
span along the forward face. (see section views). 
STEP 6. See the sketch below and section views 
to locate positions for the ¼" thick aluminum blocks. Use your dremel to remove the CSl foam from the 
aft face to enable you to insert the¼" thick aluminum blocks (LWA4, four pieces and LWA5, 2 pieces) Thoroughly sand the aluminllll blocks and flox them into the appropriate places so that they are flush with the aft foam face (CSl) with the radius on the outside corner. Allow to cure, then radius the foam corners with a hard sanding block and ° 
layup a three ply BID shear web at 45 fiber orientation (layup 5). This shear web goes under both top 
and bottom spar caps, and across the aft face of 
°
the spar, full span. Be sure orientation is 45 Overlap l" if required, but don't stack more than one overlap in anyone location. Peel ply this 
entire sheer web layup. 
STEP 7. The spar caps are layed up in this step. 
These are cut from a roll of unidirectional glass that is 3" wide and .0350 thick (it lays up about .0375 thick). Do not use UNO cloth as used 
for VariEze spar caps. You will need a total of li,'7? inches, cut as follows. 

Build a dam along the aft face of the center section spar as shown. Use a firring strip, or a 2" wide strip of ¼" plywood. Grey tape to will the assure shear an web easy with release small and dabs of glue the bondo dam every 
pieces as shown for the top and bottom spars.   
and Remove layup the the peel spar ply cap. in the There top spar are 12 "trough"plies
in the top cap, the first four plies are full  
span, side, the then last they ply taper is inboard centered 5" between per ply BL15.per
as This is possible an easy and layup, squeegee keep from fibers the as center to straight the 
outboard on each ply. Allow to cure, then round 
the with a trailing hard edge 36-grit to sanding approximately block. 3/16" (see radius section
cap views). which is Flip the similar, spar but box with and only layup 9 the plies bottom and with only the first 3 plies full span; each ply tapers inboard 7" per ply per side and the last 
and ply is round centered the trailing between edge. BL13. Measure Allow to the cure 
sand depth of (maximun the of spar-if .04) the to size. layup is Sand over-size, smooth 
the "steps" at the end of each 3" tape. 

STEP 8. Cut four pieces of spruce 1" x 1" x 3" and install these as shown by removing the  urethane foam at BL 7. 5 1 eft and right (top. 
􀁄 spar box bottom). flush Micro with the top and spruce bottom. blocks into These the blocks to box will the aft later spar. face let up Now you and set bolt make the the a three engine centersection ply mount BID spar (at extrusions 45edge ) layup around from the top three leading sides. edge This to is bottom layup leading number 6 (see sections). Now flox LWA2 (two 
pieces) and LWA3 (two pieces) into position .
These and must parts. be weight ::>Ee.., located these B-B parts directly cc. down over until the curedother 
metal , J Gt; 4 IH\. 

STEP 9. File the corners of the aluminum parts UIA2 andLWA3 to a 1/8" radius and layup (layup 7) and three LWA3 plies as of shown, UNO 3" lapping wide onto centered the top over and LWA2 bottom 
at at the the inboard. outboard hard point, and onto the top Now add one ply of BID 5" wide orientation, centered over the UNO strips, at only 45on the aft face. Do not lap BID onto the 
a top good or bottom transition. of spar Allow box. to Peel cure. ply edges for 

STEP 10. Layout and cut out a baggage access 
panel in the forward face of the spar centered 
up vertically and laterally 5" high and 14" long. 
(see page ·5). Sand the foam edges down as shown 
in Se:tion A-A, to allow a glass-to-glass edge. This _ 1s a baggage hole and allows installation 
of inboard wing attach bolts. Jig the spar box 
aft face down and layup 3 plies of BID at 45° full span lapping 1" onto the top and bottom 
as shown. (Layup 8). These three plies are 
lass to glass all around baggage access hole 
9(see section A-A). 

STEP 11. Using your dremel, make a small flox corner all around the two out-board bulkheads CS5 and CS8, trowel in flox and make a 1 ply • BID at 45° layup over each outboard bulkhead ' see section E-E (Layup 9). 
STEP 12. Cut a 2¼" dia. hole through the bottom of the spar box at B.L. 53.5 as shown (section C-C). Th􀀚s is your access for wing attach nuts. After cuu,ng the hole, remove a small amount of foam around the edges of the hole and trowel in dry micro to protect the bare foam. 

Step 13 mounting to fuselage 

Your spar is now complete and can be mounted in the fuselage. Slide it in from one side and center it on the fuselage (mark a centerline on the firewall). Check for skew by measuring from tip to fuselage nose (equal, both sides). Incidence is most important - be sure 
a vertical level held against the outboard fittings (LWA3) is level when the fuselage is level (level longerons). Level across the longerons and the spar to check roll. Remove foam or wood as required and/or install wedges as needed. When satisfied with fit, slide 
the spar out 2", coat all surfaces with epoxy, trowel ·in flax then slide it back into place. Layup two plies of 45° BID, two inches wide all around the outside of the spar at the fuselage skin. Also use 1-ply BID tape to glass the spar to the firewall on the inside. Now, referring to the sketches below, epoxy the WI6 spruce wedges 
in place and layup a 10-ply BID reinforcement that connects the 
spar with the inside face of the fuselage longerons (4 places top and bottom) Note: w1, mounts to the inside of the fuselage longerons and realigns the EM12 extrusions,allowing the Long-EZ to use a VariEze engine mount. While this layup is wet, install the EM12 engine mount extrusions extending 1.6" aft of the firewall. Weight them in place for cure. After cure, drill the four ¼" holes (per corner) as shown (2 into the longerons and 2 through spar) 
and install the 16 bolts. Don't forget the two SHl metal pieces that will later mount the rear seat shoulder harness. These bolt to the forward bolts on the top of the spar. The first two of tbe 10-ply BID plies should extend over the top of W16 and onto the top of the longeron and ,s forward over the side of WI6, lapping one inch 
onto the inside of the longeron. 
