CHAPTER 15 
FIREWALL AND ACCESSORIES 

OVERVIEW, In this chapter you will install the stainless steel firewall over the ply­wood firewall bulkhead and r,1.􀀌􀀍f"'" in­sulation. The rudder pully brackets, 
and rudder/brake belcrank brackets, are installed over the stainless firewall, 
To avoid chafing of the stainless on the bulkhead, a bead of silicone rubber seal­ant is run around the perimeter of the stainless between it and the t,􀀥,f"-ic. 
The brake master cylinders are located and temporarily installed. This chapter c.5 c.5 '11 involves A􀁁 abo\l􀁂lAok tt ,eight t􀁇f•b• hours work. CS l&,c:!. ?2 ' 􀅉 ' c.s 7.5'" -."l 

STEP 1 
INSTALLING '!HE STAINLESS FIREWALL 

Trial fit the stainless firewall to your fuselage bulkhead, over the extrusions and six screw stude installed earlier. Trim as required. Fabricate the rudder pully brackets and belcrank brackets shown 
. 'ol.Lov.> • Squeeze a 1/8-dia bead of silicone rubber sealant (bathtub caulk) onto the forward face of the stainless about one inch from the edge, all around. Push the stainless back into position 
on the fuselage and bolt the rudder pully brackets in position as shown on page A􀁢 Use spring clamps to hold the top and bot­tom in position while the rubber cures 
(allow two days cure). If one of the blind screws turns during assembly, slot its end and use a screw driver to hold it while tightening the nuts. 

STEP 2 
INSTALLING THE BELCRANK BRACKETS

Assemble the rudder/brake belcranlts and their brackets. Position the assembly 
on the firewall with the belcranlt ort=􀀄 Ffotw\ the rudder cable slot in the fire - wall ( as shown on page A '-I ) • Drill through 
-the stainless, clsb􀀋CS and plywood with
a #10 drill as shown.
The inboard holes enw. into the baggage compartment. Install ANJ-6A bolts and MS21042-J nuts using AN960-towashers against the plywood inside the baggage compart­ment, To put nuts on the outboard side,
it is necessary to grind a hole through
the outside fuselage skin {use your dremel) and dig out some foam. These holes are filled flush with dry micro after instal­lation of the nuts and washers.

STEP J 
INSTALLING THE BRAKE MASTER CYLINDERS 

The aircraft is designed for cJ􀂜ve I o.t\J 
or Gerdes reservour-type brake master cylinders, available from distri- butors, The brake master cylinders are positioned vertically between the upper and lower engine mount attach fittings as shown, Since the lengths 
of various master cylinders are differ­ent, you need to vary the height of the lower master cylinder mount angle to at­tain the c.orrect position of the top actuating arm shown. 

Make two CS ?3 bt"a.cl(e'Clr; one right-hand, one, left. Clamp the lower brackets in1D position and drill as shown, Counter-sink the lower side for a flush AN509 screw as shown. This will prevent interference with the engine mount which is installed in section II. In- stall the brackets with AN509-10R-8 screws. Another bolt through the bracket will be installed later with the engine mount.

Install the upper brake arm as shown using cs '?.5 so the arm is free to move, even though the 1/4" bolt is tight. 
This bolt is later replaced with a longer one that bolts through the welded steel engine mount {section II, engine instal­lation). 
