CHAY!'ER lG -CONTROL SYSTEM 
OVERVIEW: In this chapter you will 
install and rig the pitch, roll and yaw 
control systems. The fol.lowing items 
are available prefab: CSl, CS1A,C.Sf3f,  ST1<.1<GTt\fl!.,Cs1
CS128, CS127, CSZol, CSl32l, CS124/CS122, C.SZO.Z., C.S.191 CSll2 & CS12O. All prefab parts are welded and cad-plated (where applicable) and are ready to install 
(see photos in Brock catalog). 

Step 1 Side Consoles 
Refer to the drawings and fabricate the right side consoles (arm rests). Bond the 
side pieces to the tops with epo􀃣y. Hold with nails while you lay up one ply BID on the inside. Knife trim. Then, fit the consoles into position, trimming the 
edges to obtain a reason ,able fit. Bond them to the fuselage side, seat bulkheads and in­strument panel with micro then lay up two at and plies least BID bulkheads. 1/2" over onto their Note the that sides a fuselage and large top, sides, hole lapping is floor 
near 
open in the stick front console the stick.access 
.It This is is later for covered with installata ion cosmetic and cover(ck􀁝2.􀁟). 

Step 2. Pivot Mounts 
Fabricate and install CS109 and CS118 
plywood bulkheads as shown to the side consoles and with flox, fuselage edges sides. rounded They as are required bonded in and place glas­
sed all around with two plies BID lapping 
onto the consoles and fuselage side:. 

Firewall Pivot Mount - Refer to page 1,-􀂩 
Drill or saw a one-inch diameter hole through the firewall centered at BL 6 2R and WL 12.3. A hole saw 
or a fly cutter will be required. The one-inch 
hole is not required to be precise, and it may 
be cut by drilling multiple smaller holes around 
the perimeter and using a rotary file to clean 
up the edges. 
An oil-impregnated bronze bearing is used at 
the firewall. The Boston gear FB 1013-8 flanged 
bearing is used as shown on page 1&-5. The bearing 
is potted into position using flex and must be 
dimpled as shown in the sketch to provide a "tooth" 
for the flex to hold onto. 

The CS121 torque tube should be in position while the flox cures to maintain proper alignment 
(see Step 3). 
Use your 5/8" countersink too 1 to dri 11 the 5/8" holes in the CS117 and CS108 bearing blocks 
(page 16-3) 
The phenolic bearings must not be a sloppy fit to the 5/8" steel tubes but they shouldn't bind or drag either. If the fit isn't perfect on initial installation t􀃉e bearings can be hand­worked to fit or shimmed slightly, to obtain 
a non-binding alignment. (2 places CS117 and CS108). 
No11t that wherever AN3 bolts are installed through the torque tubes or sticks, a #12 drill hole 
is required. Use a pilot drill (#30 or 1/8") first, then drill up to #12. This avoids sloppy holes. 
STEP 3 - Ro 11 § f'iTc..H Ins ta 11 a ti on. 
Fabricate all parts, leaving CS121 long to later trim to fit. Assemble CS124 to CS122 and weld. Steel parts should have some type of corrosion preventive coating, cad-plate, zinc chromate, 
or lead oxide applied. Fabricate the CS105 torque tube, CS106 and CS115 tubes, and the two CS112 steel inserts. Study page H,-<t , and the view.s on pagel6-& to get the relationship of these parts. Slip the CS106 tube inside the CS105 tube and pilot drill (#30) the forward stick pivot hole through both tube and insert. Repeat at the rear stick pivot with CS 115. Be sure the front and rear stick pivot holes are in the same plane so that the two control sticks are aligned. Increase the size of the pivot holes to 23/64 inch for a press fit on CS112 inserts. 
File or grind a slight bevel on one edge of each CS112 insert and press them through CS105 and CS115 (or CS106) using a vise or an arbor press. Ream ¼" ID on the CS112 inserts for a free fit to the¼" bolts. Drill CS121 into CS122. 
Separate, then install through firewall. Do 
not flex CS123 yet. Slip CS108 on CS106. Install the CS107 retaining ring. This ring must snug the two washers to avoid end play( see section 
Z-Z). Slip CS117 on CS115. Place the assembly in the fuselage. Bolt CS108 to CS109. Bolt 
CS 117 to CS118. Check that CSlOS and CS116 don't touch CS117. 
Bolt CS120 on CS121. Botl CS116 to CSllS. Now, apply flex to CS123 and slide CS120 forward over Csll6. Let cure without moving. 

Install CS103 front stick and CS119 rear stick. Note that the¼" bolts should fit tight on the sticks so they don't rotate. Fabricate CSllO and install the rod ends so that both sticks are parallel with each other. Use a dremel rotary file to make clearance at fuselage side A-A). 'l11c.1<S Move :tz.o0 f{c::a􀀨 The S 0(view 11\WAIW(A. I\\. 
Holding CS124 vertical and the sticks at 5° inboard (view F-F) ., cl􀀷• LL CS 11, 1 "1':> c.s,zo 411,􀁈 Jl\!Jl!lll 
bolt:. Il\siitll C:.$ to 'l.. o..l\􀁞 CS 13, - see 'fyv,c.l'\ 
d1s.(ol\/\..ee,"t d-c."t-.,l O..\U A'f-Q.IA.l11\.j<; o.,_ 􀂅145e 
"􀀁 0..11.1 Af>. 􀀅'EE a-g, ?'! 1&-b-

Be sure to install the CS201 and CS202 bushings as shown, to allow sufficient rotation of rodends for roll control. NOTE: 
both sticks lean forward 5° with the elevator 
at neutral. The front stick grip assembly is riveted to CS103 with six dome-head rivets. The re􀂏r stick grip assembly tube is ovalized (squashed) slightly for a tight friction fit over CS119 
so it can be easily removed (cockpit room or luggage clearance). 
Note: This is all you can do until you build 
the wings and ailerons. Return to this point after chapter 19 when fitting wings. 
In􀂔tall CS125􀂕,CS126􀂙1 and quick disconnects, 
being carefull to maintain the two 90-degree angles shown on page 19-15/16 (ailerons neutral). The 90-degree angles insure that the ailerons differential is within limits (±.3")/ 

l\􀃌l􀃎 4. s11oo.-.ll 0..M.OUl\t o'r L.sl..t" 9i-ea.se To T"'e ; p"1voTC£.. (c..s P-'3, toe, IO?f B¢\H c:.􀄁 11z.). 

WARNING! 
Control System Rod Ends:
#### Bad paragaraph

STEP.q - Routing and Rigging the Rudder Cables. 
ifiisstep should take about three hours; a helper is 
handy to set the rigging and hold the cables for swaging. Cut two lengths of 3/16 OD x .025 wall high-pressure 
Nyln. flow semi-rigid nylon tubing. They are 82" long. 
These tubes are the rudder cable conduits and are routed inside the cockpit along the fuselage side contours 
at WL 8. See Al , AS, page 4-1 and page 4-2 to see 
where the conduit passes through the instrument panel, 
the front seat bulkhead, the rear seat bulkhead and 
the al1.111im111 landing gear e-xtrusion. Sand the entire 
length of the 82" conduit dull for bonding - 60 or 
100- grit. Thread it into the 4 holes, tape to the
fuselage side every 611 to hold it straight then flox
it in place at each bulkhead and every 611 along the
fuselage side as shown. It maybe required to hold
it in place with sticks extending across the fuselage.
The conduit sticks out 1 or 2 inches in front of the
instr1.111ent panel. Get two 10-ft lengths of 3/32-
diameter 7 x 19 aircraft control cable and swage an
ANl00-4 thimble and 18-2-G sleeve on one end and bolt
to the inside of CS15 as shown.

Push the free cable end forward through the firewall slot and conduit to the front cockpit. Carefull--Y position the rudder pedals and CS15 belcranks as shown and swage the forward cable ends as shown. 
This position ( rudder pedal vertical 
at full rudder travel) is about ri􀀖for the medium height pilot. Tall pilots 
like the pedal about 2" forward at full rudder and short pilots need it 2" aft 
of vertical. If you want to have the pedals adjustable, install the parts shown, about a• forward of the instrument panel where they can be reached from the cockpit. 
The rudder cable from the belcrank 
to the rudder is 1/16" 7x7 aircraft cable. SWage one end tQ the CS15 belcrankl1ut.J1ttt l\cil), route the cable through the pully and 
swage on another thimble about 8" from 
the pulley. Be sure the cable guards in 
the pulley brackets (the two cotter pins) are positioned to keep the cable in the pulley if the cable is slack. Make the quick disconnect shown. This disconnect 
is unhooked when the wing is removed. 
Swage another thimble and sleeve on 
a 11-ft length of 1/16" 7x7 cable and attach to the quick disconnect with a clev­is pin and aircraft safety pin (AN416). 
Push the cable through the wing conduit until it comes out at the wing tip. 
If it does not come out at the wing tip, recheck the length of your wing (chap­terl9)! Position the rudder with the 􀂨 l:>oard of the neutraltrailing - edge i11n·"t􀁊 6 (30) inc.hes de­out­
from grees rudder . Hold it there by stick­ing a wedge between it and the winglet. OOPS!! You and I have just noticed that the winglet/rudder is not yet installed on your wing tip! Stop right now and complete chapter 20 before finishing the rest of this chapter. 
With the CS15 belcrank positioned as  7 • shown from earlier, the (the firewalnicol) press take up sleeveth away eslack in the cables and swagethe cable end through the rudder belhorn as shown. 

STEP ) 
RIGGING THE BRAKE ACTUATING CABLES 

This is a quickie - one hour is enough. Your brake system should be installed 
and full serviced with brake fluid (be sure to t leed the brake lines) before you 
proceed. Install a piece of J/J2 cable 
(thimble and sleeve on each end) from the 
CS15 belcrank to the master cylinder actuating arm,so that as you reach the full rudder deflection shown in step 1, you are hard on the wheel brakes. Slip a piece of soft rubber tubing over this cable before swaging both ends. This master cylinder and engine mount when it is slack. Note that this short length of cable is slack until the rudder reaches its full position. Note also that the stop for full rudder position is provided by the brake master cylinder. lig turn-buckles are required1 any adjustment 
to maximum rudder deflection that may be, required, can be done with the adjustment 
already provided at the top of the master cylinder. The stops in this position also allow the use of small 1/16" cable to the rudders since the maximum load at­tainable in this cable is only about 20 pounds. 
Check that your rudder and brake system works smoothly, The spring at the rudder is much stronger than the one at the rudder pedal, so the rudder should return to neutral. In flight, airloads return the rudder with loads much greater than the spring. 

C.A\lllO#-> ! BE. su􀀡i TO􀀤 1-\AVE' 
Ai LEl't!.T o.?'' ov£􀀊'""\li?AO£L AT TH£ :;,􀀧EUJML A􀀬o AT TM£ u.>•"3Gl\􀀕 
􀂕t\􀂗1-> PtT 􀂛 􀂜unoe􀂡 A,.,ll 􀂢f\l:ll 􀂦 n£ a􀀁tc:ES.
