CHAPTER /8 
CANOPY

your OVERVIEW I airframe You now, have finished most of more chapter, your Hang long in there wouldn't for be onea In very this good open chapter, you cockpit have airpla'le to trim anyway.the  wich canopy's frame, edges, fit the make a hinges, composite latches, sand­locks, quality, and formed cockpit plexiglass vent. An canopy excellentis available through RAF  nal
It while frame is to free match maintaining blown the into 􀀷:.cLI'l􀀻e a excellent J-dimensiocontoursoptical
quality. The following prefabricated able canopy handle, from a actuating C2larms (2 components required), distributor, are CJ avail­lugs Cl-l  
2 required), C4 block, CS rods (2 req (SC.1 quired) , C.&􀁌c.h,􀁏o and C 6 tubes C.2111RA.!Ol.E. ( 2  required) , c.s  I􀁜 (1..)

STEP 1
TRIMMING THE PLEXIGLASS
This hours. step Your should canopy take comes about crated one to to two pro­
tect it from scratches during shipment.  u
No can suggest inspect protective that your you coating canopy protect is on your applied, receipt. canopy so Weyofr
scratches by spraying or brushing on a om tic •peel building  coat•* it the for or frame by and protection taping while paper while you or you paint plas­are
over
the aircraft. Leave this peel coat in
place except where the instructions  call 
ctfor its removal. When your canopy is 1s 􀂚ts poi,..,:􀂢􀂣 Th\,-. o" 1 ?Al T􀂫G􀂭. t-)°t I􀂲 Ot.l 'je"'-r A't Lep􀂐"C'p,ttt

the lines Trim the shown. canopy A band plexiglass saw, an along abrasive skill cutoff saw, disc or in a a saber hand saw held will grinder do theor
job,ruin 􀃊 your in whole any day case, (not go to slow or mention you'll  your 
to cellent canopy). be the tool We've easier is the found method. number the 406 Another abrasive steel ex­discsa
w

able blade as an (about accessory 1•-dia disc) for your that's dremel avail­
hand grinder. Save the end that you  cut
It off1 another makes you an EAA'er may be excellent for able to something windshield trade you it for to need,
an open cockpit airplane! 
edges glass with Remove edges all with J20-grit a nicks file. sandpfrom apethe r. Polish plexi­Nicksthe  s can start cracks in the 
or plexiglass.scratche
* "A" -For you "peel need coat• about you 1 qt can use Spraylat

STEP 2
LOCATING THE PLEXIGLASS ON THE FUSELAGE
This step Make should onlytake JO minutes
or so. four blocks from the   full­made
size from supports 1" patterns for lumber. your shown. These canopy The are and blocks are temporarydisare
card­as ed with shown. later. gray tape Tape and the prep plexiglass the surfacesedges

B0ndo the four wood blocks to􀀁inside surface of the top longerons as shown. 
You can make a small up or down adjust­ment of the aft blocks, if necessary, 
to get the canopy top line tangent to 
fair into the top of the firewall. 
Don't trim the firewall to accomplish 
this. If you do, the cowling will not fit. 

STEP J 
ASSEMBLING THE CANOPY FRAME FOAM CORE 

This step should take two to three hours. This step involves mounting some over­
size urethane foam blocks all around 
the canopy, These are later carved to 
the shape of the canopy frame. Round 
up your box of 2"-thick urethane foam 
scraps. Fit pieces of 2" urethane to 
the canopy plexiglass and fuselage sides as shown. Working with l to 2-foot long pieces at a time is fairly easy. 
Bondo and micro the blocks as shown. The micro and Bondo are applied to the 
foam block, then it is held in place 
while the Bondo sets. Where foam blocks join, keep the micro joint low (no squeeze­out on surface) to make later carving 
easier. 

STEP 4 
CARVING THE OUTSIDE TO SHAPE 

This step should take about two to three hours. Use your foam shaping tools to carve the outside to shape, as shown in the photos and sketches. 

Note: Photos in this chapter are VariEze. Ignore presence of fuel tank and any 
dimensional reference. 

STEP 5 
GLASSING THE OUTSIDE OF THE CANCPY FRAME 

This step should take two hours. The 
fuselage sides within .8 inches of the firewall should be sanded dull for bond­ing. Micro slurry all foam surfac􀀜 
and lay up BID pliesf Ulllb pl,􀂺J fiber 
orientation 0-6 􀂼.ho􀃀I\• • Note that along the sides,the first PL􀃇 1􀀞 
laid down into the groove. The groove 
is then filled level with flox and the 
last 3 plies go over the top. 

Knife trim around the taped longeron areas and firewall. Do not knife trim into the plexiglassl The scratches from this would give cracks a place to begin, If trimming is required along 􀀡he taped plexiglass edges, it is done after a 
full cure, using a round bit in your 
dremel (􀀃ind down just to the tape edge as shown), Be careful to cut the fiber­glass and not into the plexiglass under the tape. Let the layup cure for 48 hours. 

STEP 6 
TRIMMING, JIGGING, AND REMOVING THE CANOPY 

This step should take two hours. Use your hacksaw to cut the canopy front 
and rear as shown. Don't cut into the longeronl or the instrument panel! or your finger! 

When you have the front and rear cuts done, Bondo on a bunch of lumber 
(front, back and sides like in photo) 
to keep the canopy fram,e from warping while working on the inside. When the Bondo is hard, use your butcher knife 
to pop the sides loose from the longerons. Don't just pull or the Bondo blobs on the longerons will break big hunks out of 
the inside foam, Lift the canopy off of the fuselage and set it upside down on your work bench, 

STEP 7 
CARVIJG THE INSIDE FOAM 

This step should take one to two hours. Carve the inside foam surfaces on the 
fuselage as shown. Carve the inside foam surfaces of the canopy as shown. 
Remove all of the foam ( down ----=tc, top skin) in the areas shown for hinge and 
latch reinforcements. 

STEP 8 
LAYING UP THE HINGE AND LATCH REINFORCEMENTS AND THE INSIDE GLASS SKINS 

This step should take about three to four 
man-hours. Mix a batch of' wet f'lox. 
Fill the holes carved for latch 
and hinge reinforcements by alternating 
layers of f'lox with BID plies. Overfill 
the holes slightly so the reinforcements 
can be sanded flush after they cure. 
Trial fit the contoured canopy to 
your fuselage to check its fit. Then 
take it back to your work bench and lay 
up the inside glass as shown. Glass the 
inside surface of' the rear cover on the 
fuselage with o,,.e pl.y , BID lapping 
onto the firewall as shown. This layup 
is easy if' the fuselage is turned over. 

STEP 9
INSTALLING THE VENT AND CROSS BRACING TUBES 

This step should take you two hours. 
Carve a green urethane block as shown. 
Glue it to the inside of the canopy frame as shown with a blob of .5MIN. Glass 
over the foam block with three plies 
BID. Lap onto the inside glass of the 
canopy an inch. 

After cure, use the dremel to cut 
the skin along the pattern shown, and 
remove the foam. The result is a NACA 
flush scoop that provides excellent 
ventilation for both cockpits. The sim­
plest valve for the vent is a plug, carved 
to fit tight { carve from d􀀅'r \< b.lu(-p, V, ) , 
The plug stops all flow when fitted straight and allows partial flow when stuck in 
sideways. 

Carve holes throl.{1;h the glass at the canopy frame side in six place& as shown, with your dremel. Cut three lengths of 5/16 OD fiberglass arrow shaft tubing 
to fit across the canopy. Sand the ends dull for bonding. Install the tubing 
with flox > filling the holes to 
flush. The two aft tubes support the 
aft head rest { see cll􀁚􀁛'2,). When this 
is fu.l.zy cured, you can knock the Bondo 
and boards off of the outside. 

STEP 10 
INSTALLING THE CANOPY HINGES

This step should take an hour. Locate 
the canopy hinges (MS20001-􀀦) as sho􀀨n, OP?e6,"t􀁬 ,􀁮 recesses, carved during 
􀀫,􀀭l" eight • Drill four #10 􀀴oles verti­cally through the longerons in each 
hinge. Countersink (100°) the hinges for AN509-10R-3O screws and install as 
shown. 

Now with the hinges bolted in place on the fuselage, put a blob of Bondo 
{or ,SMIN) on the canopy side of the hinge, locate the canopy on '\fie <l'Us•lage and let the Bon.do harden. Flip the canopy open and drill 􀁖 the hinge, as shown, with a #1? drill bit in eight places. Be sure these holes go through the rein­forcement pads of the canopy (two holes per pad). Counter bore the top of the frame for an MS21042-3 nut to sit below contour. Install as shown. Don't be upset if you can't get the canopy to fit perfectly. The frame or fuselage can 
'be filled with dry micro and sanded to fair in. 

STEP 11 
INSTALLING THE CANOPY LATCHES

This step should take from one to four hours, depending on how well everything fits! Refer to the full-size drawing 
on 10-q 􀂂 18-IO for the details of the canopy latch locations and hardware. 
Make all of the metal parts shown, and install the three pivot bolts, Clland ca.arms, and pushrods (CJ, c4, c5, and C6) on the longerons. With these items installed, take your C7 and C8 extrusions and a batch of Bondo, climb into the cock­pit, close the canopy,and (one at·a time) 
position the C7 and C8's on the canopy frame to match the pivots and arms. Hold the C7 and C8's in position while the Bondo hardens, then open the canopy gently and drill in as shown. Install all latches with AN525-10R12 screws 
(install wet with flox, wipe excess). File away the exposed threads on the front screw of each latch to avoid in­terference with the c2/c1 arms. 
Adjust C4 so that all three latches seat evenly, For a good seal, contact 
cement a thin, soft,foam 􀀠ubber strip to the canopy frame where it mates the fuselage. Adjust the lock plates (C9) slotted holes, so the canopy closes􀀢 gly when the handle is pulled firmly l'orward and into the c9 holes. 
CAUTION, Good workmanship and fit up of the canopy latches,is important for flight safety. Poor canopy reten­tion on your airplane can ruin your whole day. 
The C9 plate and bolt head on C1􀀩 engage in such a fashion that you have to move Cll. forward smg pull it inboard to unlock the canopy. This prevents it from being bumped open inadvertently. 
To keep your canopy from banging on the fuel tank when open and to provide some shock absorbsion if a strong wind gust blows the canopy open, a cable retainer with a shock cord is mounted as shown. This can be made from a motorcycle or bicycle-type bungee strap . 

STEP 12 
GLASSI1'G AKI> 11'S'.rALLiftG THE PROJff TOP PUSEIAGE COVER 

'this step should take about two hours. 
The front cover is the hunlt of glass and 
foam. forward of the canopy that was left in place on the fuselage, way back in 
step 6. Pop the forward cover free of the front bulkhead and longerons. Remove the tape and take the cover to your work bench. Contour the inside foam surface so that 
the foam is about 1/2• thick. 

Glass the inside foam surfaces with one 
ply BID, a.llow to cure an hour or two, then 
flip the cover over and install on the fuselage with flox. Layup a BID tape over the outside as shown, to join the outside skin to the 
fuselage skin, and to F28. 

STEP 13 - Safety Catch. 
Refer to the drawing for the SC-1 canopy safety catch. 
This catch keeps the canopy from opening more than 
l" if the pi 1 ot forgets to 1 ock it for takeoff. Do 
not skip this installation thinking you.will never 
forget. Experience has shown that the most proficient 
pilots forget, if the conditions are unusual. All 
of us at RAF have forgotten on at least one occasion. 
Canopy up 1H is easily handled in any flight situation, 
however􀂁 canopy fully open is an extremly dangerous 
flight condition requiring good pilot ability to maintain aircraft control Several pilots of VariEzes have 
handled this successfully, but in at least two cases 
it has resulted in an accident. The SC-1 automatically engages the AN525/Csl3 bolt when the canopy is closed 
(locked or not). To open normally, you lift the 
canopy up about l", then push inward on SC-1 to disengage (similar to safty catch on a car hood). 
Do not omit the knob on C7 - it is required to close 
the canopy in high winds.

STEP 14 - Door 
The door shown prov1aes a hole to reach through allowing you to fully lock the C-ll handle when you are outside your aircraft. The door also allows emergency canopy 
opening from the outside. Print the letters "EMERGENCY CANOPY OP ENING" on the outside of the door. Apply 
the lable shown on the inside of the door. 
If you desire to install a key lock to secure your 
aircraft from radio theft, install a small drawer­
type key lock (available from hardware stores). 
