CHAPTER '" 
WINGS AND AILERONS 

Overview: This• is it, the big one! 
In this chapter you will build jig templates, cut foam cores, layup shear webs, spar caps and skins, install 
attchment reinforcements, build and rig-a-i--l-erons and 
install wing-mounted aileron controls. Study carefully the dimensioned plan view drawing and all the section 
drawings to get thoroughly aquainted with your wings 
before you start. The wings have no roll trim tabs 
like the VariEze. Roll trim is provided in the cockpit and the wing incidence can easily be adjusted to trim 
the airplane at neutral aileron. Do accurate and careful work here -smooth, straight wings make fast, good­
flying airplane. Details show a right wing -left 

win!l is a mirror image. Note: LwA􀀅 t,,.), AZ. (2) o.􀀍 A;("'\) are available at a Long-EZ distributor. 

STEPl. Building the jig templates. The jig consists of _five templates that fit over the outside contour
of the wing at five spanwise locations, perpendicular to the trailing edge. The tops and bottoms of all 
jigs are at the same waterlines {WL 24.4 for top, 10.4 or bott􀀔m), thus by merely sighting or stringing them 1n relative to each other in a straight line, you are assured a perfect wing with the correct twist. The 􀀷􀀸g templates disasemble into 4 parts (2 parts for 
Jig #5) to allow you to partially remove the templates for wing skinning etc. 

Cut the rectangle shown from smooth, flat, ¼ inch thick · plywood. Draw the three lines shown {WL 17.4, trailing edge mark, and vertical line). Note -jig 5 does not have the vertical line. 

Now refer to pages All through A13. Glue these pages together to obtain a full size drawing of the wing 
cutouts in the jig templates. Cutout the indivdual pieces and glue to your jigs as shown, using care to line up the WL 17.4 lines and the T.E. {trailing edge) line. Now, saw along the rib shaped lines to obtain the correct wing cutouts in your jigs {see sketch) 
Note that the reliefs in the lower leading edges are there to allow you to make the top skin overlap in 
step #8. 

Now, saw each jig into 4 pieces (2 pieces for jtg5) by sawing along the WL 17.4 line and the vertical line. 

Cut out 17 pieces of¼ inch 
thick plywood 1" wide and 8" long. These provide "links" to detach the various pieces of each template. Lay each piece as shown across the WL 17.4 lines and vertical lines flush with the template edge {17places) on 
one side of each 1 ine drill two ¼" holes spaced as 
shown. On the other side of each line carefully mark 
the outline of the link. On jig #1 through 4 the holes must be drilled on the T.E. side of the template. 
Number and remove .the li11􀀡. Reassemble the templates.using l¼" long, 
¼" diameter bolts {cheap hardware store type - you need 34 bolts and nuts) and. glueing the links to the non-bolted sides with Bondo or wet flox. You now have rigged templates that can be unbolted into 4 pieces (2 pieces for jig #5). Be sure 
the assembled jigs are square and parrallel. 
Your finished jigs should look like this sketch. 

STEP 2 - setting up the jig. 
"Tfietfrst set up. jigs your wing leading-edge􀀂. 
to allow layup of the full-span shearweb. It can be jigged on your table or floor - the shear web layup 
is reached easier if you jig on the floor. 
Draw a straight line 125.6 inches long , set the jigs leading-edge up as shown and shim as required to get them in a straight line and vertical - use a string 
and level. Bondo the jigs to the floor. To provide adequate support, Bondo some small diagonal wood pieces as shown. Recheck accurately that they are vertical 
in both planes and top and bottom edges are in a perfect straight line. 

STEP 3 - Cutting foam cores. You will need f111e Tx14 x 64" & two 7 x 14 x 41" styrofoam blocks for each wing. You will have excess foam left over for winglet construction. 
Template constrution - glue page A 9 to page A 10 at the line shown. Glue this entire page to a 2' x 4' piece of 1/16" birch plywood. Carefully trim and sand 
smooth all edges of each template. Tr􀀎nsfe􀀏 the water lines and talking numbers to the opposite sides. Spray­
can type paper adhesives, available 􀀎t stationary stores is best to glue the paper down. Avoid water based 
paper  glues - these shrink the paper Study the p􀀐an view of the wing (page1􀁕-IO) to aqua nt yourself with 
the three major areas of the wing : 1 - inboard, tha􀀕 portion from BL 23 to BL 55.5, aft of the centersection spar. 2 - center, that portion from BL 55.5 to BL 
106.25. 3 - outboard from BL 106.25 to the tip at 
BL157. 

Now refer to page \1\-1\which shows how to layout the planform and to cut the cores. Stack the cores together 
as shown and attach with sticks and 5 minute epoxy 
as shown. Be sure to not leak epoxy down into the 
joint - it stops the hotwire. Do not use Bondo. The angles on both sides of an individual core are the 
same - ie. 78.64° for center and outboard and 77.51° 
for the inboard. Since it is difficult to accurately layout an angle, use the method shown - draw a 90° line with 
a carpenters-square, measure up 42" then over 8.44" 
(center), up 28" then over 5.63" (outboard) and up 
28" then over 6.20" (inboard). Now layout the planform 
using all the dimensions shown. See 􀀭hapter three 
for hot wire sugg_estions. Use a vertical level. on 
straight templates to make an accurate planform. 
Support the foam firmly with weight on a flat tabl · Sloppy hot wire jobs make crooked 􀀰 wings. Recheck :dimensions 
on planform blocks and mark trailing edges. Use a . straight, undamaged edge of a -block for the _trailing_  
edge. Using the hotwire, cut all planforms. 0"3 ouTBoA􀀹 

􀁠oc.􀁢S ,"ouiJT 􀁩lb􀁬 Klfl\ .,, o..l\ow e􀁵uek 􀁹􀁺 .... tor 􀁾•"f ,􀀻:-ts. 

Then using the suggestions in Chapter 3, hotwire the cores start each cut resting onthe small tabs on the leadi􀂁g edge. Do top first, then bottom, starting each cut on the tab. Be sure wire is ti ht a d  temperature correct. Adjust temperature for a cut o 7 1 ,, 􀁁in 4 to 6 seconds with light load. Check this on a scrap before each cut. A too hot wire makes 'craters' in the surface and makes the part too small. A correct temperature pulls tiny "strings" (angel hair) from
the foam when cut is through. Too cold causes wire cut, lag, recheck ruining the for posspart's shape. Before starting any 
2 to 3 seconds at each ible talkingnail snags. Be sure to  pause spar corners). troughs. This allows sure lag the "TE  tcatch number with and a makes "P" (all accurateBe to up ately lined up with the trailing edge of rim" the line foam is block.accur
Be sure each waterline is level. 

Note that the inboard block is thicker at one end than the 7" block. Use a scrap block on top to fill in this extra (see sketch) 

Note that the BL55.5 rib is used at the outboard of 
the inboard block - only to the front of the spar trough. The hot wire stops on the tabs of the BL 23 rib. Then, remove both ribs and using the vertical straight templates, accurately cut the inboard cores' leading edge, double checking the 22.8" and 25.1" dimensions. The length 
of the leading edge of FCl should now be 32.87 inches. Check this, it is important for correct positioning 
of wing attach points. 
Next, the center and outboard cores are cut into two pieces along the shear web. This is done by aligning the vertical templates accurately along the forward 
edge of the spar troughs. This cut should be perpendicular to the waterlines - check this. 

Now, refer to chapter 3 page 6 for instructions on foam core bonding. Bond the foam pieces together where there are joints due to the l􀁞" blocks (see sketch). Use lotza nails to hold in place and cure. You now have 5 pieces, labeled FCl through 5 as shown. 

Next, align the "torque tube" templates against each end of the FC 1 inboard core. One. at 
BL 55.5 aligns with TE for positioning. The other. BL 23.aligns along top surface 9.2" from 
TE (along !QE_ surface) as shown. Using the hotwire, follow the nl.lllbers (0 to 16) and cut the core 
out. which will later allow installation of the airleron torque tube. Move fast between #0 and 
#2 and #14 and #16, to avoid a large gap in the surface. 

Next you will modify the FCl inboard core to allow 
later installation of aileron controls and wing attach 
11 
reinforcements. Layout the 6 and l" dimensions and bandsaw off the wedge on the inboard end. Turn this 
wedge up ,.on end and bandsaw out its center as shown 
with a 0.6" width all around. Bond the 0.6" wide "shell" 
back onto FCl, then reinstall the center piece to temporarily support the shell. This center piece will later be removed after wing is skinned. Note, if you do not have a bandsaw this wedge and shell can be cut with the hot wire. but  􀀍n􀀎 if you do  it before glueing the individual pieces o1 together.

The 0.6" dimension is critical only where it will later align the wing attach at the top forward edge (see section C-C). At other places it can vary ±.25" without concern. For further clarification see view GG and 
0-0.

Aileron cutouts. Now you will hotwire the aileron cutouts. This will not remove the ailerons from the wing. only make someTnside cuts. The ailerons are 
not removed until after the wing is skinned. Locate 
the three"aileron" templates. nail the root and mid 
span ones to FC 2, lining up the templates to the TE. 
Be sure FC 2 is placed and weighted flat on a straight surface (not warped). then hotwire #0 through #15. 
Pause in corners. but move fast between #0 and #2 and 
#13 and #15, to avoid a large gap in the top foam surface. Now locate FC 3 and layout the demensions shown. Using a coping saw or hacksaw blade, cutout the 3" x 8 chunk 􀀙BL erpendicular to the T.E. Position the "aileron tip" 118.1) template as shown and hot-wire the inside
cutout #0 through #15, using the midspan template again. 
this time nailed to BL 106.25 on FC 3. See sketch. 
11 
After hotwiring. bond the 3" x 8 chunk back in using 
wet micro. 

A few dabs of 5 minute mixed with flox can be inserted in the gap in the top surface to better stabilize the core from warping. Leave the center pieces of foam in. 

Now. locate FC 4. FC 5 and the two sma 11 templates that make a l" diameter hole. This hole is located near the bottom surface and will later be used to install any desired electrical wires for position lights 
or strobes. Position the templates as shown - this gives a straight hole that misses any foam joints and ends up at 12. moving fast at the surface. Remove 
and discard the l" core form both FC4 and FC 5. 
This completes the hot wiring of cores.. If you do 
not immediately jig them. store in the origional blocks. weighted down. to keep them from warping. Protect from sunlight from now on, until your airplane is painted.

STEP 4 -Assembly of foam cores and layup of shear 
web. Grab the foam cores for the right wing and slide them into the jig, positioned as shown. After confirming that they all fit accurately, remove and set aside 
t􀀜e two large leading edge cores (FC 4 and 5). Now 
micro FCl, FC2, and FC 3 to each other, positioned 
as sh􀀠n in the jig. Check the 1", 5" and 10" (3 places) 􀀂􀀃mensions. Place a few small dabs of flox between Jigs 􀀅nd cores to keep  things from moving around, on _!QE. wing surface 

Now remove the fort1ard two pieces of jigs 1,2,3 and 4 to expose the shear web area. 

Layout and cut the 1.7 inch wide wing-attach access 
depressions shown in FCl, tip and bottom. See also.,.,,_,, Section B-B. These should have round corners on the 
inside. A coarse rotary file bit as shown is used to cut the depressions. Refer to section B-B for accurate .f!fil!1b of these. Top is not the same depth as bottom 
wiath and position is the same. 

Now, using a sharp knife or razor saw, notch the shear 
web as shown, to position the three¼" thick 2024T-3 
aluminum blocks flush with the shear web face. Outboard 
2 pieces are LWA4, inboard single piece is LWA6. ____ _,,, 

Now, glass layup #1, a two ply BID "liner" in the access depressions. Knife trim· flush with edges all around. 
Micro in the two LWA4 and one LWA6 metal pieces flush with the shear web face and with the radius on the outside corner. Now, fabricate WI8s the two pieces of .016 thick alumimum shown and bond them over the access depressions in the spar cap area -5 minute epoxy is ok. They must sit perfectly flat against the foam -hold in place with small nails to cure. 

Next is the shear web layup (layup 2), it extends across the shear web and down the spar cap faces top and bottom, full span. Cut 12 pieces of 13" wide 45° UND as shown. Roll them up to prevent fiber distortion (elongation 
of long dimension) . 

Radius the foam edges, full span approximately 0.2R 
to match the radius of the metal blocks and allow a smooth layup around the corner. Be sure all foam faces flow smoothly over all joints, without joggles. Layup the first ply full span diagonally across the shear 
web face at 45° . Wet out onto the three sides then 
trim edgesjust short of the joggle. It's better to 
be ¼" short of the joggle than to lap or-􀀍 up against it. Do not allow a buildup here. You need 2 splices. Butt, do not overlap the UND cloth at the splices. 
The second ply is the same except crossed diagonally 
the other direction, and running full span. Check 
the approximate 45° fiber orientation on the shear 
web and spar cap faces. Squeegee all plies well, from the center along the fiber direction out-toward the joggle. Do not leave excess epoxy or overlaps that buildup the area incorrectly. The thickness of this layup must be correct. 

The 3rd through 6th ply are similar, except they do 
not extend full span. 3rd and 4th are crossed and extend from 39" from tip to inboard end. 5th and 6th are crossed and extend from 91" from tip to inboard end. 
The completed shear web is 6 plies thick from BL 23 
to BL70 ... 4 plies thick from BL70 to BL120 and 3 plies thick from BL 120 to BL 157. Add a 3-ply BID at 45° pad (layup 3) at the two locations shown to strengthen attact-.nent areas. These pads are centered over the metal parts and do not extend over onto the spar cap area. Then, epoxy tfie LWA3 and LWAl. plates on, centered over the other metal parts. Weight in place for cure with about 10 lb on each plate. Peel ply the spar 
cap faces. 

Refer to Chapter 3 page 6 (foam block joining) then bond the FC4 and FC 5 leading-edge cores in place over the shear web. If the shear web is not cured it will allow you to use nails to hold FC4 and 5 in place. Replace the front pieces of jigs 1, 2, 3 and 4 to hold FC 4 and 5 in the proper position. Accurately check the fit at the shear web so the joggle on each side 
of the spar cap area is the same dimension (see sketch). 

Check.that all jigs stand vertical in both planes to assure a straight wing with the correct twist. Place small dabs of flox to bond the wing cores to the jig, top surface only. 
Check all alignments by sighting all sides of jigs, and let cure. Your wing should look like the sketch below. 

Now place a carpenters square on the inboard spar cap joggle and mark FC4 as shown. Use a carpenters saw 
or coping saw to saw off the corner - see plan view page \CHO 
STEP 5 - Bottom spar cap. 
Break the bondo away from the jig TE, 1 i ft the entire wing (with all jigs in place) to your table and lay 
it bottom up. If your table is perfectly flat your wing will set down with all jigs in contact with the table surface and with the wing aligned. If not, shim each jig as required until their edges "string" and 
"sight" flat. Weight in place if necessary. Bondo each jig to the table surface to hold it firmly in place. Recheck alignment, then unbolt the two bottom pieces of each jig (one for jig #5) to expose the bottom of the wing. 

Remove the peel ply on the spar cap area and sand if required to remove any bumps or high places. Install 
a ¼" plywood "dam" on the inboard area to contain the spar cap. The dam butts to LWA3. Now, cut the five strips of 3" x .035 unidirectional tape to the lengths shown and layup as shown. Do not use UNO cloth. Squeegee each ply from the center out to the ends. When you 
are done, the spar cap should be built up to just flush with the foam edges. A spar cap that is a little-­low is prefered to one that is high (easier filled 
and finishing sanding won't cut into wing skin). After cure, round the leading edge between BL23 and 55.5, 
to flow smoothly into the front face (Section B-B and 
C-C). Using a fresh 36 grit hard block remove the joggles at the ends of the spar cap strips and fair
􀀃ny high s􀀅ots down to the foam level. If the cap 
1s low, fair the foam down to it, this low place is 
eas°"fly filled with micro over the skin during finishing. 

STEP 6 - Bottom skin. Fair smooth any bumps or joggles at the joints on the entire bottom surface of the wing. Carve and radius the edges of LWA3 and LWA7, to fair into the spar cap. The bottom only gets 2 plies of skin, so care must be taken to avoid any lumps. If 
the skin has a bump it is easily dammaged there when sanding during the finishing process. A smooth, straight foam core makes a light, strong wing. A crooked, lumpy foam core makes a weak wing that gets heavy in the finishing process. 
Blow or vacuum the wing clean as well as your entire work area before skinning:-cut a 65 inch length of 
l" wide peel-ply. Using small brads or staples, tack it down in the position shown on your foam core. The skin gets glassed over this strip of peel ply, so it must lay nice and flat. If you're curious why you 
are doing this, refer to step JO. Install peel ply 
held with small brads of staples every 10" along the 
TE. overlap area (see sketch). This is later removed before skinning top. Fill any gaps around the spar cap with dry micro and 􀀳􀀴ke a small flox corner around 

The skin is two plies of unidirectional UNO, each joint is butted not overlapped. Do not trim selvage. Refer to the sketches for ply orientation. Note that the first selvage edge orients diagonally across FC2 and FC4, then the remaining skin is butted parallel to it. This is also true of the 2nd ply of skin except it orients on the opposite diagonal, crossing the first ply. Be sure all fibers are straight and squeegeed from the wings center toward the edges. The third 
ply is a reinforcement of BID at the tip as shown. Peel-ply the entire surface of this BID reinforcement. 

Sissor trim the inboard edge BL 55.5 rib wingtip edge L.E. and T.E. to less than ½" excess. At the leading edge face of FCl , lap each skin ply down the face
4 inches. (see sketch). Use flox to avoid bubbles at the edges of LWA3 and LWA 7. Be sure the glass
is stippled well into the trailing edge overlap area witr.1Jut voids, and stippled/squeegeed down well around all edges including the leading edge. Peel-ply the
3 inch wide strips shown near the attach depressions. (See step 9). Also peel ply the leading edge, 2" wide. At knife trim time, trim the TE flush with the foam edge and the L.E. at the L.E. tangent line as shown. Trim the inboard rib, BL 55.5 rib and·tip rib flush with the foam edge. Also, at knife trim time pile some !:!!:.l mi.cro onto the T.E. depression as shown.

STEP 7 - Top spar cap. After bottom skin cure, bolt on the jig pieces you removed in step 5. Apply some dabs of Bondo to join these to the cured bottom skin. Now, using a small chisel, knock off the Bondo dabs 
that hold !he jig to the table. Turn the wing over, recheck al1gnment and Bondo the jig to the table. Make one final check for straightness and twist - there is .!!Q. adjustment after skinning the top. Remove the top pieces of the jigs to expose the top of the wing. Follow the instructions in step 5 to layup the spar cap exce t use the lengths  and dimensions delow. The top cap has seven plies.

STEP 8 - Top skin. Follow the instructions_ in step six with the following exceptions: Before skinning you must install the nylon conduit for the rudder cable. This is a .025 wall 3/16 0.0. Nylaflow tube - do not substiutue nylo-seal tubing. Layout the locationas shown using the fullsize template for the small curve at the tip and a straight line to the dimension at 
the root. The dremmel tool held against a straight edge as shown works well for this groove. See the completed installation in Section A-A. At the root, curve the conduit downward (deeper groove) about 0.7" over an 8 inch length. (seeG-G). This "points" the conduit at the rudder pulley. Hold the conduit in place with tooth picks every 10". Fill the groove with dry mocro just before skinning. Cover with a piece of tape to keep epoxy off the outboard 3" 
of the conduit groove (see Chapter􀁄). The 
conduit should stick out 2" on each end of the wing. 

Remove the leading-edge peel ply from the bottom skin. Refer to the sketch and carve a smooth taper on the last½" of the bottom skin. A fresh 36-grit hard block works well for this. See also Section A-A,p􀀣 ,􀀌-,􀀏. 

or Cut a stapl65 i􀀤ch long strip of 1" wide peel ply. Brad 
: 1t flat on the foam surface immediat€ly forward of the a1leron hot-w1re _ gap. Lap this peel ply slightly 
over the gap to keep excess epoxy out of the gap. Using a hacksaw blade, remove the foam ridge at the trailing edge. Then peel back the peel ply to expose the bottom skin. Then use a 36-grit hard block to fair the foam smoothly into the overlap. Do not gouge into the bottom skin - its only 2 plies! If theft is not straight between jigs, shim it as required to hold it firmly until the top skin cures. The top skin has a third unidirectional ply, installed before the top BID reinforcement. This third UNO ply extends from the aileron hinge line forward Q!!b'._ (see sketch). Stretch the selvage along the hinge line and smooth the cloth forward. Then proceed with the BID reinforcement. 
Do not put the 3rd ply over the aileron! 

Wrap and squeeggee each ply, lapping 2" onto the bottom skin at the leading edge (see section A-A). This is best done by first painting epoxy underneath, then 
on each ply (1) layup skin leaving excess hanging down (2) sissor trim to 2" (3) wipe onto bottom with a squeege. Successive plies can be sissored shorter to taper over­lap. Wrap the skin down the inboard face similar to the bottom skin, overlapping it 1", peel ply the 3" x 12" stips near the attach depressions. Install 3 plies 
UNO layup #4 over the inboard wing hard point (LWA7) 
as shown. These are 3" wide and 14, 10, and 6" long. 
(section C-C).

Squeege well for a smooth, light layup. Check for 
vo􀀁ds and inspect for a good TE and LE overlap. Knife tr1m the TE accurately flush with the edge of the 
bottom skin. 􀀂nife trim the inboard and tip ribs. 
After cure, wh1le the wing is still in the jig, carefully check for level waterline (reinstall a top jig template). 
Then Bondo􀀙ft straight board on the cured top skin 
􀀃s 􀀄hown, sh1mmed to exactly level. This is now your 
1nc1dence reference for rigging wing to the fuselage. 

STEP 9. -Wing ribs. Refer to the adjacent sketch 
and section F-F. The rib about O. 7" with a rotary 
file. Stand the wing on its trailing edge. Remove 
the 3" wide strips of peel ply around the attach depressions. 

Layup 3" wide UNO strips as shown (layup 5) wraping 
around the metal areas and lapping back 12" onto the 
wing skins, top and bottom. Two plies are required, 
each is 30" long. Fibers orient along 2..Q!!.[ dimension. 
Then, layup 3 plies BID in the rib hollow (layup 6) 
section F-F. One of the 3 plies laps 4" inboard, covering the previous UNO reinforcement. After cure, cut out 
the attach depression holes as shown. Note, the 3" 
UNO strips are not cut. 

Now, remove and discard the large foam block in the 
wing's inboard end, exposing the face that is 90° to the trailing edge. Study carefully views G-G and M-
M. Also sections C-C, E-E, and N-N. Note how the 
0.6 inch foam "shell'." is completely removed for glass­to-glass layup around all outside edges and at the 
forward face where the CS127 brackets will mount. The foam is also completely removed at the LWA 6 (¼" thick alumimum) block. Note also the local removal at the CS 132L belhorn (view G-G and section E-E). 
Caution -leave the 0.6" directly above the inboard 
wing attach (view M-M and section C-C). Using a knife, rotary file and sandpaper, conduct the required surgery on the shell. Use care to not damage the nylon rudder conduit. Then layup a 3 ply rib in the entire area 
(layup# 7). While its wet, layup 3 plies UNO 2½" 
wide lapping over the LWA 6 piece, extending 1" below H and 4, 5½,6" aft of it (layup 8 Section C-C). Clamp LWA 7 in place and cure. AFter cure cover LWA 8 with 1 ply BID, extending 1" all around. 

STEP 10 -Ailerons. Study Sections H-H, I-I, J-J, K-K and L-L to aquaint yourself with your aileron and wing trailing-ege spar. Layout the dimensions shown below. Then using .i:l razor saw -cut the skins and remove the aileron.

Jig the wing leading edge down and remove the foam 
shown by peeling off the peel-ply installed before 
skinning the wing (see section I-I, H-H and J-J). Smooth up this trough and extend it into the wing on each 
end -see sections K-K and L-L. Layup (layup #9) the 
wing trailing edge spar. This layup extends about 
1" into the torque tube hole on the inboard end -round the foam edges here. This is 3 plies BID and 1 extra 
BID at the hinge locations. Overlap 1" where needed, 
but Aon't stack overlaps at one location. This layup 
extends out the edges to the T.E. (Section K-K and L). Be sure to avoid voids at the skin laps. Sissor trim to¼" after each ply. Knife trim flush all 
around. Notch the wing top skin 0.2" deep in the
places shown below. These will later accept the hinges and allow the skin to seal the gap between hinges.

Refer tci the f􀀐 ,,􀀓,, drawing and fabricate these metal parts. Caution -Reverse the hinge halves before sawing to length (see,􀀗-\?). Slice 3/8" of foam from the 
LE of the aileron and bond the 3/8 dia steel rod on 
with dry micro -full aileron span. Mark the hinge 
positions from the wing, then remove foam to install 
the two A-5 pieces flush with the front face. Remove foam for the A-10 tube and fit it as -sfleWfron Section I-I, also fitting A2 flush with the forward foam face. The AlO tube extends one inch inboard from the inboard edge to the aileron. Positioning is important to aileron balance -accurately recess the A2 and A5 pieces. The 5/16" holes go against the !QQ_ skin. 
After assuring A2 and A5 are parallel to each other, jig the aileron trailing edge down, round the corners, bond AlO and A2, and A5 in with wet micro andlayup 1 ply BID at 45° over the leading edge lapping 1" onto top and bottom skins. Peel-ply the edges. This is layup #10. Set the aileron aside to cure. 

Now remove the 0.4" of foam at the ends (section K­
K and L-L). Layup 2 plies BID to form the end ribs 
(layup #11). 

Back to the wing, now, using a straight edge, align the extruded hinges in the wing notches so they are all parallel. Drill the seven #12 holes through the wing and hingeas shown. (drill #30 pilot hole, first). 
Install the An 525-10R8 screws and KlOOG-3 nutplates 
(see I-I and H-H). 

Now, place dabs of Bonda on the aft hinge pieces and position the aileron on the wing to line up top and 
bottom skin and T.E. After the Bonda cures, remove 
the 7 screws, remove the aileron and drill the 24 holes for the pop rivets. Se􀁒 l'!J l􀁖-\7 
Then, pop the Bonda loose, remove the hinge pin, sand the aileron and hinge halves dull and pop rivet the 
3 hinges on with wet flax and 23 pop rivets. Keep 
flax out of the hinge holes. 

Now, hang the aileron by a fine wire, not string, through two hinges and check balance. The aileron must hang 
between the angle that makes the top level and the 
angle that makes the bottom level after painting. So, if the bottom is nearly level it may be out of tolerance after painting, You can add maximum of 0.3 lb to 
the nose tobalance by stacking lead behind the steel 
bar (do not extend forward, this ruins aerodynamic 
balance)-. -If .3 lb aft of the steel bar is not enough you will have to discard and build new ailerons -your first ones have execessively heavy, epoxy-rich skins 
and cannot be made safe. This will happen only with 
poor workmanship. 

Now -mount the ailerons and check all gaps (top, bottom and sides) against the tolerances on Section J-J and K-K. The ailerons should move free with no excessive binding. 
STEP 11 -Controls. First fabricate the phenolic block and metal parts· shown full size Pl t"-1? dimensions not shown. Drill (#12) and bolt the parts together 
as shown. 

Remove the layup #7 glass rib, in the 1.6" diameter 
area at the torque tube hot wire hole Revise dimension A to position CS 132L and CS 152 as shown in Section 
E-E with CS 151 about ¼" from the glass rib. Install 
the aileron. Slip the phenolic block (sand its surfaces dull with 36-grit) onto CS152 and flax it up against 
the glass rib (section E-E and view G-G). After cure, 
remove the aileron/torque tube assembly and layup 1 
ply BID (layup# 11), over the phenolic, lapping 1"
all around. After cure, remove glass from the hole. 
Install the aileron and the CS 132L belhorn. 
Refer to the CS127 bracket and all adjacent parts 
(view 0-0). Assemble these, including the two pushrods. Position the stop bol􀀻 to stop CS 128 20° travel from 
the neutral postion shown. Bolt the assembly on the 
shear web in the position shown in view 0-0 and view 
G-G, using the four An 3-4 A bolts. Hook up the pushrod. Adjust it so the stop bolt stops the motion at 20° 
up aileron. A Sears "Angle Finder" is real handy to 
check control surface travels. 

STEP 11 ATTACHMENT - WING TO CENTERSECTION SPAR. 
Mark A and B marks on the wing top and centersection 
top directly above the center of the aluminum blocks. Hold the wing up to the spar to verify that the A-A. 
and B-8 marks line up. This verifies correct horizontal position of all blocks before drilling. Refer to chapter 6 and 7 section drawings and verify correct vertical positions before continuing. When the wing and center­section holes are drilled up to 5/8" diameter they 
must be drilled in place together to assure bolt angle and position alignment. The procedure is for right wing. Left wing is a mirror image. 
STEP 1. - Pilot holes and access holes in centersection spar. 
The drawing below shows dimensions for the 3 holes 
on the aft face of the cente.rsection spar. Lay these out accurately and drill straight through into the interior of the spar with a #10 drill. 

While you're at it, layout the same dimensions on the 
centerseciton spar forward face. Drill these 3 holes ¼" diameter. 

STEP 2 - Wing line-up and line-bore. 
Jig your fuselage level - level longerons and level centersection spar. Cut several large foam wedges from you wing-hotwire scrap pile, and round up two sawhorses. With these, position the wing up to the centersection spar until it butts to it in the correct position. Observe the following about wing jigging: 
(1)     Sweep - with the wing butted to the center 
spar the sweep should be correct. Check this if 
you wish, and check skew by measuring from the nose 
to each wing tip. However, fit to the spar is more important than sweep accuracy, as this has a very small effect on flying qualities. Butt to the spar even if the wing tips are as much as 3 inches different than the correct sweep. 
(2)     Dihedral - with the wing top and bottom edges matching the top and bottom edges of the centersection spar, the wing should be flat, at its 17.4 waterline plane. The top slants down and bottom up due to the thickness taper. Check this if you wish, by sighting a long level, using a water filled tube or using 
a transit. However, fit to the centersection spar 
is more important to aerocynamics than a slight difference in dihedral. Fit the spar accurately even if it changes dihedral as much as two inches at 
the wing tip. 
(3) Incidence - with the wing butted to the centersection spar, the reference board that is Bondoed to the
wings' top should be level. Incidence must be set exact, or the airplanewTil roll. Jig for zero incidence, even if it requires several shim washers 
on one of the outboard attach bolts. Once the wing 
is jigged, apply several large Bondo "lumps" to 
connect the corners of the wing and spar top and bottom. Once cured, these will firmly hold them in po.sition 
for line-boring. 
Locat your 10 inch long,¼ inch diameter drill bit 
and drill through from the front all three holes 
as shown. Clear the bit every¼" of drilling. do 
not start this job with a dull bit. 

Now, locate your 5/8" spotface with ¼" pilot. This is the same too 1 needed in Chapter 't and U,. As 
in the above paragraph, drill through withthe spot face, going slow and clearing the bit often. Do 
not attempt this with a dull spot face. All holes are now opened to 5/8 and aligned with each other. 
You must fill the inboard hole on the forward face 
of the spar (foam and 2 plies BID) to seal fuel 
from the spar. The outboard ones can be left open. 
Machine or purchase the LWA9 bushings - see drawing. 
Now, knock off the Bondo and using the tool shown, measure the actual depth of each of the six 5/8" diameter holesl'si>ar and wing). Face the LWA 9 bushings to a length that is the same as, or .010 shorter than the hole length. do not make the bushings 􀁅 than the holes. Epoxy the bushings in and Tetcure. 

Refer to chapter 7 section B-B and G-G for locationsfor the wing mounting hardware Needed are(uJ-.w•􀀲;\
#### TODO: TABLE

Additional 960-816L washers may be needed if required to shim incidence. One washer changes incidence by 0.4 °. Finer adjustments are made by filing washers. 
Tool needed for wing attach: 

Note: Due to the long (28.83 inch) distance between bolts, the tolerance on fit of bushing-to-bolt is not real critical, like it normally is on aircraft wing atachment. Even a .015" clearance ("slop") is acceptable and safe. The large diameter ½" bolts are selected 
to get adequate washer - overlap on the bushings. 
from a purely strength stand point, ¼" bolts are enough! 
