CHAPTER 2D 
WINGLET AND RUDDER 

Overview: This chapter involves building the 
large vertical fins, mounting them to the wingtips, building and mounting the lower vertical fins, 
fabricating the rudders and hooking up rudder 
controls. The right wingtip is shown. Reverse 
to a mirror image for the left winglet. The 
upper fin has undercamber facing outboard. The 
lower fin is cambered inboard. In-flight, the 
upper fin lifts inward and the lower fin lifts 
outward. This lift distribution works against 
the nonnal vortex rotation at the wingtip, 
increasing the effective aspect ratio. The result is an increase in climb and range, as compared 
to a vertical fin not designed using the NASA 
Whitcomb-winglet technology. 

STEP 1. Cutting cores. 
Refer to the planform view and hot-wire configuration drawing. The hot-wire templates are on page 
Refer to chapter 3 and 7 for details on hot-
wiring cores. The root (WL 18.4) template is 
used for the top and bottom fin. Hot-wire the 
cores. Then round the bottom pieces LE and shape 
it's tip as shown. Do not round the top winglet. 

STEP 2. Glassing the skins. 
Note the top fin is undercambered on the outboard side, full span. The bottom fin matches the 
top at WL 18.4 then transitions to a cambered­inward airfoil section at its bottom. 
iheleft-over blocks the cores were cut from 
are used to jig the cores flat. Glue these 
to a flat table. The cores are easily warped until both skins are installed. Jig them for glassing by nailing at the root and tip and, 
if necessary, with small dabs of 5 minute. Recheck that rootand tip level lines are parallel (no twist). 
Glass the outboard skin with the following schedule: 1st ply UNO - orientation diagonally from the root TE to the LE. 2nd ply is also UNO, and crosses, from root LE to tip TE. 3rd ply is on upper surface only - it is BID at 45° extending from root, up 18". Peel-ply the entire BID surface. Knife trim all around. 

Refer to wing chapter for similar LE and TE details to obtain the correct skin overlaps, then jig and skin the inboard side using the same layup schedule, as outboard side. Be sure the root and tip level lines are parallel. Refer to the plan view. Carve the 1" tall tip cap from urethane foam. Round to a pleasing shape and skin with 1 ply BID. 

STEP 3. Jigging upper winglet to wing. 
After cure, refer to page A II for the wmgl et trim template. Cut this piece of paper out and wrap it around the inboard side of the upper winglet, lining it up with the LE (extend the level-line up the LE), and lining it carefully 
along the root edge. 􀀄ark the tri􀀬 line then saw the piece out (coping saw) sawing roughly 
perpendicular to the mark. Discard the piece.

Now, layup your wing top-side up on the table, wedge it up so it doesn't rock around. Weight 
it down with about 50 lb of sand bags. Locate 
the winglet-positioning refer ce point (WPRP) 
and mark it clearly. This is the inboard front corner of the aileron cutout. BL 55.5 and FS 
149.6 (see page 1•1-to). Now, set the winglet on 
top of the wing top surface. Have someone hold 
it and move it around until the A - B and C dimensions are achieved. It's best to set a 
box along-side and tape a stick to it to hold 
the winglet upright while jigging. The A dimension is from WPTP to the LE mark on the winglet at 
the top surface of the wing. The B dimension 
is from WPRP to the root TE of the winglet. The 
C dimension is to the tip TE of the winglet. 
A and B are critical and should be within .05" 
C is not critical and can be± l". Once positioned, mark the wing top skin at the inboard edge of 
the winglet. Remove winglet. Cut the wing all the way through, being careful to not knick the rudder conduit. Discard this piece. 

Now, lining up the edges as shown and rechecking the ABC dimensions, jig the winglet to the wing. This time hold it firmly in place with 2 or 3 
3/4" diameter lumps of Bondo. Support it sideways with a 3 foot length of 1 x 2 lumber with lumps of Bondo on each end. Be sure this is not in 
the way of the A measurement. 

When the Bondo is hard, remove the box and 
recheck A - B and C. 

STEP 4. Inside layups. 
Study Section C-C to see the inside layups. Turn the wing over, extending the winglet off the 
side of the table, exposing the bare foam faces. Remove the foam locally, with a knife, as shown, by cutting out a triangular flox corner all around. This is 2" deep in the "high stress areas", and 
½" deep around theother edges. The "high stress area" ex tends from the rudder conduit to the leading edge, along the winglet wing touching edges. Do not remove the wings' shear web. Sand the inside glass surfaces. Carve block A to 
fit nicely as shown. This extends from the wing TE to the winglet LE. It is carved from 2 lb 
(green-urethane foam. Laminate 2 pieces of 2" thick urethane. Do not glue in block A yet. 

Cut 8 strips of 45° BID, 4" wide by 12" long. Now, layup the eight small inside tapes, {layup #1). Trowel in flox to fill the void. Where the void is excessive, fill portions of it with foam wedges (see sketch}. The flox and foam wedges hold this layup finnly against the winglet skin and wing skin and spar cap. Knotch the 
8 plies locally to fit around the shear web in the wing. 

Allow this to partially cure to avoid an exotherm, then fill the flox corners and glass layup #2, 
the inside ribs. These are 8 plies BID forward 
of the rudder conduit. Extend two of the 8 plies aft to the winglet TE. Position the rudder conduit at 13.2" from the winglet TE along the outside edge of the winglet. Layup #2 joggles up over 
the conduit - trowell in dry micro to avoid air bubbles. After sufficient cure to avoid exothenn, trowell in some wet micro and install block A. Block A must fit well enough to avoid air voids. Weight or nail block A in place for cure. 

STEP 5 - outside layups. 
After cure, carve block A to a flat diagonal, not round, as shown. Remove peel ply. Round the edges for layup and glass layup #3, the structural bottom - outboard layup. This layup consists of 2 plies BID, extending 15" up the wing and 12" up the winglet in a tapering fashion as shown plus 7 plies UND. Make the 2nd BID ply about 2" shorter to taper its edges. Thread 
The BID around the rudder conduit. Now, cut the follwing 7 UND plies, using care to orient fibers along the A dimension. 

Refer again to the sketch, layup the 7 plies 
of UND with fibers running around the corner as 
shown centered on the corner. Keep fibers  straight. Peel-ply all edges to make a smooth transition. CURE. 

After cure, turn wing over, knock out the Bondo lumps in the corner, remove peel ply and glass 
layup #4, the structural top - inboard layups. 
This layup is identical in size, number of plies, and orientation as layup #3. Lap the 2 BID plies 
1" onto the outside of the winglet at the lower leading edge. Peel-ply edges for a smooth transition. Cure. 

The top winglet is now structurally attached to the wing. Remove the 3 foot 1 x 2 board. 

Do not increase the nllllber of plies - your winglet joint can withstand 90-degrees sideslip flight 
at 170 mph - considerably over nonnal requirements. 
STEP 6 - Lower winglet attach. 
Trim the lower winglet as shown so its root -
WL 18.4 fits up to match the upper winglet. Fill the small voids shown with urethane foam and micro it in place. Glass a 2" wide tape of BID at 
45° to structurally attach the lower winglet 
at the outside and inside as shown (layup #5). 

Now you can install your desired wingtip light 
(see Section III). The light must be installed 
at the position shown. Do not add weight aft 
of that location. Also do not cut into the structural area. 
An optional fairing block can be installed as shown in view B-B to fair the wing tip into the the winglet surface. Use any type foam covered with 
2 plies BID 

STEP 7 - Rudder 
Carefully layout the rudder dimensions shown, on the outside and inside of the winglet. Saw through the skin on both sides with a razorsaw, then cut through the foam, to remove the rudder. The rudder is hinged on its outboard edge with a piano hinge. The piano hinge is 7 .5" long, extending from WL 18.4 up. Study section D-D, view B-B and Section E-E. 

Set the wing leading-edge-down. Remove foam as shown, . 6" deep at the top and bottom and 1" deep at the front. Glass 3 plies BID in this entire area plus an extra ply on the edge where the hinge will go (layup #6). Knife trim. After cure, trim the hinge area forward 0.2" x 7½" 
to recess the hinge. Drill and fasten the hinge to the wing with three AN525 -•bR9 screws, with K-1000-3 nutplates on the hinge. Trim the hinge width as required to fit.

Grab the rudder and, in a similar fashion, remove foam all around the edges. Remove 0.6" top and 
bottom and 0.8" on the forward face. In addition, remove a tapered depression to reinforce the 
belcrank as shown. The depression extends 2.4" 
deep from the hinge line, on the outboard side. 
It is conical in shape and centerd at WL 18.7. 
Glass this area (layup #7) with 3 plies BID plus an extra ply at the hing and belcrank depression. 

When cured, install the hinge and belhorn using 
the 7 pop rivets and 2 each AN 525-tott􀀆 screws, 
AN 906-lOlwashers and MS 21042-3 nuts. Install 
cable and swage fitting. Max rudder travel is 
30° however the swage must still have at least 
0. 7" travel until it bottom􀀉the conduit -
brake master cylinder i.?... the rudder stop -any 
other stop will leave you without brakes! 
Return spring -this returns the rudder to neutral on the ground. In-flight, the airloads force 
the rudder to neutral unless the pilots steps 
on the rudder pedal. In stall the tube and hook 
shown, near the top of the rudder along the inboard skin. The l" hole in the foam can be cut easily 
if you file some notches in the end of a tube 
and rotate it to saw the hole 1 i ke a 1 ong "ho 1 esaw". 
The edge, marked "A" is the rudder stop. Long-Els do not have, nor need inflight rudder trim the 
edge at A can be trimmed to allow the rudder 
to move more inward or shillVlled to move the stop 
outward, to provide ground -adjustable rudder 
trim. Once trimmed for ball-centered flight, 
further adjustment should not be needed. 
