CHAPTER 21 
WING STRAKES -BAGGAGE, FUEL TANKS, 
AND FUEL SYSTEM 

Overview -This chapter is late in the construction so other things can be built without having to lean over 
the large wing strakes. The strakes provide several 
functions -(1) torsional stiffness and strength for 
centersection spar, (2) crew accessable map stowage 
r 
and baggage areas, (3) two 25.5 gallor--s-etectable fuel 
tanks with sumps, and aerodynamic lift. 
In this chapter you will jig and build the baggage 
areas and fuel tanks out of glass and type 45R rigid 
PV core, install fuel sumps (to provide fuel in unusual attitudes including sideslips, nose-down parking, and 
steep descents), plumb fuel lines forward to a valve 
and back to the pumps and gascolater, and plumb vent 
lines. The complete fuel system shown supercedes 
information in Section IIA and IIC -do not use engine 
installation details from these sections for fuel system. The location of all components and plumbing is important to the correct operation of the fuel system. Do not 
iod"fy. The instructions refer to only the right􀀉de -eft 1s similar except where indicated. Start by studying 
the plan view drawing, and all section views to aquaint yourself with the strakes. Exact planfonn accuracy · 
is not required. If in doubt just trim or shim to 
fit. Do use care to set the incidence by setting the 
17.4 waterline correctly. 

The accompanying sketch outlines the fuel system. It is a two-tank, selectable, pumped (not gravity) system with an engine-driven pump plus an electrical backup 
pump. This is similar to most low-wing light planes -Grumman, Piper and Beech. 
The selection valve (left-right-off) is located on 
the lower front floor, just below the instrument panel. The gascolator and electric pump are mounted on the 
firewall. Each tank has a sump to provide continuous fuel flow during unusual attitudes, descents and nose­down parking with low fuel levels. 
STEP I Mark and cut fuselage and make parts. 
Fabricate the parts shown below and the R23 and R45 
ribs shown full size on page Al4. These are all made from type 45 PV core (dark blue) foam. On the out­
board skins layout the 22.4 and "A" dimension before 
cutting off the 32 x 4.9 diagonal. The T.E. bevel 
is to fit under and over the bevels on the centersection spar. You will need 6 32" x 48" sheets of type 45 
PV core. Butt together with micro any necessary joints. 
Refer to the drawing showing fuselage dimensions. Left side is shown, right is similar. Layout the lines 
shown, inside and outside lines of the fuel tank skin (0.35" apart).-Using a sabre saw or pin router, cut 
the large holes in the fuselage side. The aft edge 
of the forward hole is flush with the face of the front seat bulkhead. A 2 inch diameter drum sander with 
coarse drum on your drill motor is great for final 
shaping of these cutouts. 

STEP 2 - Jigging, and inital assembly. SEC PS A1􀀞. 
Jig the airplane to a flat table as shown, or jig a flat piece of 4' x 4' plywood up, flush with the bottom of the centersection spar. Level the table (or plywood) and level the fuselage longerons. Fabricate the 35x 1.45x2.15 jig board fromw.ood or foam. Now, fit the inboard and outboard bottom skin in place and fit the􀀫 R45, R23, B23, BAB, BLE and TLE parts together -temporarily hold in place with nails. Bevel ends of the TLE and BLE to fit. Jigging is easy if the curve in the skins is permanent. To put a permanent curve 
in the skins, weight them into a curved shape with 
2 boards as shown and heat with a 1000 to 1500 - watt hair dryer or heat gun. After cooling, remove boards. 

When jigged properly, the WL 17.4 mark on rib R45 should be 2.65 inches above the table and rib R23's 17.4 WL mark should be 3.45 inches above the table. Refer 
to page A 11 to see the use of the l.45/2.15 jig board. It supports the lower skin LE at the correct height, full span. 
Lay some plastic or grey tape on the table to avoid glueing things to it, then mix up some micro and glue the following pieces permanently in place: outboard 
and inboard bottom skin,BAB,TL£J BLE, R45 and R23. 
Be sure to use enough micro to avoid voids in the fuel tank area. Wipe a small radius in all corners and recheck alingment. Allow TO CL>f'Z:t, 
Cut the l¼" hole near the inboard aft corner of the inboard bottom skin (see page21-'1). Bevel it as shown in section H-H. 
Install al" x l" piece of 1/8" thick 2024T3 aluminum at the low drain position for nose down parking -Section I-I. This piece is drilled an tapped 1/4-27 NPT pipe thread before installation. Be sure the tapped hole is deep enough for correct positioning of drain valve. 

STEP 3 - Inside layups. 
Now glass layup 1 - one ply BID into the entire fuel area, lapping up l" onto the fuselage and spar, and completely onto both ribs, TLE and BAB. See sections 
A-A, B-B, D-D and G-G. This is easiest in several pieces - overlap l" on any joints. This layup should appear wet to avoid pinholes that can leak fuel. While its stiTl"wet, install 823 and DB, glassing their sides with a single BID ply (layup 2) that laps onto the bottom - section E-E. 823 should be installed first
so its glass laps directly onto the outside face of 
R23. Glass one ply BID (layup 3).on the outside face 
of R45 that also covers the bottom skin and laps l" 
onto the centersection spar (section D-D). Add a 
2 inch wide strip of 2 plies UND along the outer diaqonal edge of the bottom skin, lapping l" onto the spar. 
Fiber orientation along the long(22") dimension (see
F-F). Layup 3 also includes 1 ply BID that covers
the bottom floor of the baggage area, lapping onto
R23, BU., BAB and the fuselage, as shown in sections
D-D, B-B, C-C, and G-G. This layup laps up onto the glass-to- glass fuel sight-gauge on the fuselage side. Knife trim the baffle notches. Knife trim edges shown in all sections. Knife trim open the l¼" diameter hole, and the drain hole. Remove the foam under the drain insert as shown and install a 1/8 npt plug. Check that the drain is at the low point for nose-down parking. If not, trowell in micro as shown. Now, allow layup 
1, 2, and 3 to cure. 

STEP 4 -·Vent and Screen. 
Referring to the sketches, install the ¼" aluminum 
vent line. Apply a liberal amount of wet flox around 
the fuselage hole, both sides. Be sure to sand the alumimum dull for bonding. Install a dome-shaped aluminum screen over the l¼" hole - see sketch and H-H. This provides the same function as a finger-strainer, protecting the fuel system from large-size contamination. 

STEP 5 - Top skin cores. 
Now, grab the two pieces of top skin, heat form 􀀒he curve, and fit them into place. Hold in place w1th weights. Be sure they fit against, or within 1/10 inch, to all fuel tank walls. Stack the lumber on as shown and attach the lumber with dabs of Bonda. This lumber holds the top skin in its correct shape while you remove it for glassing. If you omit the lumber trick, you will wrinkle the layup. 

Now, remove the top skin/lumber assembly turn it inside­up and glass its surface with 1 ply BID (layup 4) 
plus the 2" wide strip of 2 plies UND at the outboard diagonal (section F-F). Leave l" of the BID􀀖 
and hanging over the edge all along the inboard edge. Sissor trim the other edges. This layup should appear a little wet. Let cure only about 2 - 4 hours - enough to get a good grip on the foam, but still tacky. Then, clean the tank insides, paint epoxy along all joining edges. Paint a fresh coat of epoxy on the inside skin (layup 4) where it will join, then invert the assembly and carefully place it down into place using care to not wipe off the flox with sideways motion. This trick takes 2 to 4 people. Hold in place with weights, nails􀁢 or clamps. Wet the l" dry edge of BID onto the fuselage side (section C-C and G-G. Inspect in the baggage- area and all around to insure the lid is down in place everywhere. 

You may need to remove lumber to assure its all weighted into position. Before cure, install layup 5 - tapes 
of 1 ply BID that connect the top to R45, R23 and BAB. Also - layup 6, a one-ply BID tap e at section C-C. Cover any remaining bare foam edges around fuselage cutouts with 1 ply BID. Use care to not get any micro or flox on the fuel sight gage area. Be sure these layups are wet-enough to avoid air or pinholes that can leak fuel. Allow to cure, without moving things and with the vent line open, so the tank can breathe. Do not leak check yet - the tank is not structural until after step #8. 
STEP 6. - End rib and outlet plumbing. 
You can now remove the table or plywood jig. Fabricate OD by holding a piece of foam against the skin cores and marking top and bottom. Cutout the oval hole. Glass the inside with 1 ply BID {layup 7) and flox 
in place holding with nails. Layup 7 should connect to the spar at the aft end of OD, similar to layup 
did to the fuselage. After cure, trim and round edges 
{section F-F). 
Layout and drill the 7/16" hole in the fuselage under the tank. Fit an eight-foot length of 3/8 x .035 1100-0 soft aluminum tube from the front cockpit floor, right side of the cockpit and to the 7/16" hole. The tube must lie in the corner of the fuselage side and after seat bulkhead before going through the 7/16" hole. It should extend only 0.4" outside. 
This provides stress relief to protect it from leakage at the fuselage side. Note that both lines rout down the right cockpit side. Rout the left tank line aft of the aft seat bulkhead just below the large acess hole. Fabricate asmall wood plug as shown to keep epoxy out of the tube. Clean and dull its surface 
for bonding. Paint epoxy on the tube and fill the hole with flox. Install the tube through the fuselage 
using liberal wet flox covered with 1 ply BID to hold it firmly in the corner of the aft seat bulkhead. If you hold a finger over the outside hcle as you push the tub1? through it will force the flox around the tube, rather than push it out. Remove the wood plug after installation. Do not move things during cure. 

STEP 7 - Bottom outside skin and sump. 
Turn the fuselage over. Stuff a rag inside the l¼" hole to prevent contanimation. Using a hard 36-grit sanding block, fair the P-VC edges as required to fair into the spar and fuselage. Round the leading edge and OD {section F-F and B-B). Sand the spar surface for bonding. Blow or vaccum off dust. Trowel wet micro into any voids, particularly around the fuel tank area. Remove the rag. Remove the 1/8" npt drain plug. Trial fit the sump blister. 
Refering to the sketch, glass layup 7 the two crossing UNO plies, lapping 4" onto the spar, 3/4" onto the fuselage, fully down the face of TLE and BLE and half way down OD. The first ply covers the entire strake with fibers parallel to the tank leading edge. The second ply also covers the entire strake with fibers running fore - aft. Butt any required joints. 􀀊"•&P PLV I􀀍 a. 'a, "c." U􀀎b "iih\lo.-. -
fob71 f,..y IA􀀂l>. 

Now, while this layup is still tacky install the sump blister with wet flox and a 1 ply BID tape (1" wide) all around {layup 8 - section H-H). Caution - do not get flox in the 3/8" tube. This layup must look wet to avoid fuel leaks. Be sure the tank vent line􀀛 3/8" tube is open to a 11 ow the tank to breathe during cure - otherwise a pressure change will cause a leak. 

STEP 8 - Top skin. 
Fair the top, round the corners, sand the spar, remove dust, trowel micro in voids, and glass layup 9 - the top skin. It is similar to the bottom skin, except a 4th ply is installed as shown on the left􀀸 to allow you to later sit or stand on the strakewnen
entering the aft cockpit. Peel ply edges for a good transition. Cure. 

STEP 9 - Pressure check. 
Retap the 1/8" npt drain hole and install the drain 
or a plug. Do not over-torque. Use teflon tape thread seal. Plug the 3/8 line in the forward cockpit. Hook the vent line to an altimeter through a tee. Blow 
a pressure of 1500 feet altitude chang into the tee and plug. Let the tank set for severa ; hours to check 
for leaks. Ignore small variations in -t-/:le-a-Himeter - these are due to atmospheric pressure changes and temperature changes. 
If you have a leak, first use soap bubbles brushed around all plugs and fittings, then around tank joints. It is ok to remove some of the forward end of OD to check or repair a leak in that corner. If you find 
a leak in the composite structure, first rinse off all soap with clear water and let it .f.!!U1_ dry (hair dryer helps - otherwise give it a full day). Then suck a negative pressure on the tank and continuously brush epoxy into the leak, letting the negative pressure draw the epoxy into the hole. Then, open the vent 
(no pressure) and continue to brush epoxy on the leak area. Let cure with no pressure. 
STEP 10 - Outboard fairing block. 
Drill a ¼" hole through the bottom skin near the leading edge between OD and R45. This will vent this area 
and drain any collection of moisture. The remainder of this step can be omitted until finishing - since wings have to be fitted. 
The fair block is non structur􀀟l. You may make it hollow or solid, using 2 lb/ft3 urethane or styrofoam. See chapter 23 for installation of 􀀠TltoBt Ul..llT, if desired. Mount the wing, then fair the block to fit. Cross two plies UND for a sufficiently durable skin. 
STEP 11 - Fuel valve, electric pwnp and gascolator. Refer to the drawings. Install the shelf and valve on the instrllllent panel. Orient for correct left­right pointing of the valve handle. Plumb the left and right 3/8" fuel lines. Plumb and run the 3rd 3/8" fuel line down the right side and through the firewall. Mount the electric pllllp and gascolator as shown and plumb the tubing. 

Fuel caps, specifically designed for VariEze are available at a Long-EZ distributor. These are a sealed unit, locked, as shown in the drawing, by a Dzus fasterner. 
Do not substitute a vented cap. Do not substitute 
a cap that does not have a relieableTock. Wait until after your aircraft is painted to install the fuel 
caps: This will result in a neat installation and avoids contamination of your fuel tank. To install 
the cap, bore a hole in the position shown, with a 
2-¼" hole saw. Trial fit the cap. Dull the metal
rim bonding surface with 100-grit sandpaper.
Now, tape al" tube to a vacllllm cleaner hose and thoroughly clean the foam chips out of your tank. Mix flex and trowel it into the lip and coat the metal 
rim. Drop the rim in place and wipe excess flex from around the rim edges, tip, and bottom. Be sure to 
wipe any flex off the inside of the rim. Weight it 
into place and cure. 

NOTE: Many of the Continental 0-200 engines are 
not equipped with a mechanical fuel pump. On some, 
a mechanical pump can be easily adapted. On others, 
this requires major work involving a different cam 
and machine work on the case. 
At press time for printing these plans, test work 
is underway to evaluate several fuel system configurations to allow use of the non-p1.n1p-equipped 0-2oo!s. They 
fotlude: 

1. A system with free-flow check valves that use gravity as primary and the electric pump for backup and nose-down parking - CA􀀁B. (no engine mechanical pump.) 
2. A system using the electric pump as primary and a Christian #844 wobble pump as backup (no engine mechanical pump). 
3. A new pump drive on the engines vacuum­pump pad. 

All three systems work. We are currently evaluating all three and will select one, based on re liability, cost, and weight considerations. Details of the 
selected sytem will be furnished in Canard Pusher 
newsletter #24 or #25. 
