CHAPTER 22 ELECTRICAL SYSTEM 

This chapter presents two alternatives to the electrical system: 
System I is low cost, light-weight,providing sufficient power for the engine instruments, the warning system, 
a NAV com radio and an electric turn/bank gyro. 
This is adequate for day-VFR flying. __ _ 
System II uses either an alternator or generator 
and is sized to allow installation of lighting for night flying, electric engine starting and additional avionics. 
We recommend system I because it provides the lightest, lowest maintenance, lowest cost installation. It results in a better performing airplane with longer range and more fun to fly. In addition, it keeps 
the cg further forward where the flying qualities 
are most sol id. This is a definite consideration, particularily for pilots weighing less than 160 
lb. Both systems use the 25 amp-hour battery in 
the nose to provide the correct cg. 
Use system II only if you require night lighting 
or extensive avionics. Remember, the Long-EZ is smaller than the average light plane and thus is effected to a greater extent by the addition of 
excess weight. A light Long-EZ is a thrill to fly 
and has extensive utility. A Long-EZ that is loaded down with extensive systems, avionics etc, can 
be so heavy as to preclude two-place operation and destroy its exciting solo performance. Resist the 
tem tation to add anything. In an airplane thissma l1 you should be carefully counting grams, not 
just pounds of excess weight. The best test to 
decide whether something should go in the airplane 
is as follows. Take the object in your hand. Toss 
it up into the air - if it comes down,its too heavy 
to belong in your airplane! 
Starter - Electric start, while available for the 
Long-EZ, does compromise it enough so that we 
recommend against its installation. The engines 
are easily hand-propped, particularily since you 
have a pusher with nose-down parking. In this config­uration most aspects of manual start are considerably safer than for conventional aircraft - see Owners Manual. The plastic airplane does not conduct. 
Thus, your large heavy -start cable must run to the battery and back. Electric start adds over 25 lb weight, most of it aft on the engine. You will initially want to fly your first flights at forward 
cg and at as light a weight as possible (see Owners Manual). Therefore, even if you inist on needing electric start, leave the starter and heavy cable 
out for your initial test flying. This will avoid possible nose balast (thus a double weight penalty). 
The s􀁃ems are presented as follows: 
Basic wiring schematics for System !,System II -
.genera tor and System II - a 1 tern a tor. Then, the individual diagrams for warning systems, lighting, engine instrumentation and starter. Finally, installation general arrangement sketches detail 
items like mounting of equipment, battery box, 
routing harnesses, antennaes etc. 
If you are not familiar with aircraft electrical systems, get some help from someone, or study references covering basic wiring practices/tehniques. The "Mechanics Bible", EA-AC 43.13-1A2 Aircraft Inspection and repair - Acceptable methods and Practices covers much of this. Obtain from US Government Printing office or Aviation Maintenance Foundation, Box 739, Basin, Wy 82410 
Due to the wide variety of builder preference, no attempt is made to list a bill of materials. Add 
up your own requirements from the specifications 
shown. Always follow individual manufactures recommendations when installing electrical equipment 
(strobes, regulators, etc). 
In general, it is preferred to mount equipment as 
far forward in the airplane as possible for cg reasons -except for heavy pilots and no electric start. For example, it is better to put the start relay, over voltage protection, etc up on the front of F22 bulkhead rather than back on the firewall. 

We show an overvoltage relay in the alternator field circuit. This relay is not required for normal operation but would protect your radios if the regulator failed closed and the alternator produced more voltage than the other systems could handle. Generally, 
the battery prevents this from happening, but the overvoltage relay is good insurance if you have 
a stack of expensive radios. 
We don't show a master relay. All normal current 
can be run through the master switch shown. However, if you are considering an extensive amount of avionics and other gadgets, a master relay may be necessary. 
Remember throughout your wiring that each unit must 
be grounded. Leave enough room on the ground busS 
to accomdate the large number of ground wires that will be connected there. 

If your aircraft has a starter be carefull that it is not inadvertently activated. Use a guard on the switch and always disconnect the starter lead before performing􀀑 maintenance on the aircraft. The alternator needs the field circuit energized 
(12v) before/during operation. The alternator won't operate without a battery (dead or disconnected). However, the generator will. Refer to the generator wiring schematic if one is used. Generators use 
a dfferent regualtor and wiring. Always be sure 
the battery is connected to the main bus at any 
time the alternator or generator is on. This provides a buffer against voltage spikes/surges and give 
some protection to your avionics. 
Be sure the amp out-put of the regulator is compatable with the generator. Regulators for generators regulate both volts and amp out and also have a reverse current protection where regulators for alternators only control voltage out put. 
Warning System 

This warns the pilot with a light and horn if he advances power for takeoff without fully locking the canopy. The same light and horn warn him if 
he retards throttle for landing without the landing gear fully down. A horn-defeat circuit is included so you can silence the horn (light stays on) for 
low power flying with gear up (stalls, descents, etc). The defeat resets upon throttle increase. 
Strobe Lights. 
The Long-EZ is relatively small and is sometimes difficult to see especially in areas of low visiblity. Therefore a strobe light system is advised, even 
for daylight flying. This can be a single strobe under the nose. The Whelen System shown provides wingtip strobes and all the red/green/white position 1 ight requirements. It meets the FAA requirements for operations at night. If you select another 
s.)51:em be sure it meets the FAA requirements. When ordering the strobe power supply, be sure to state Model A413A-HDA-14 "singJe flash". This model was made especially for us and has a 30% reduction in current drain. If it has a "OF" after the HOA it 
􀀝s the higher current model. Mount the power supply 1n the center spar fairing (left side) as shown, 
or on the back of the front seat bulkhead or in 
the left thigh support. The A600 PG/R-14 lights must go where shown. Do not mount lights in the structural winglet attacharea or up on the winglet. 
Landing Light
#### TODO: Paragraph

Gear and cano􀀂y warning - this system 
has a resetting de eat feature. The main advantage is the ability to silence the hem, while doing 
gear-up, slow flight or descents. The 1 ight 
stays on as long as the trottle is retarded. 
Each time you cycle the throttle the hem will 
sound and will have to be re-silenced. This 
eliminates the possibility of switching the 
warning system off during gear-up descents, 
and forgetting to rearm it for the landing 
approach. 

ANTENNA'S 
The antenna's that we recommend, and use on the 
prototype N79RA are available from Jim Weir of 
Radio Systems Technology, 10985 Grass Valley Ave. 
Grass Valley, Ca 95945. 
These antennas are cheap, simple and work well. They 
consist of four torroids and 48" of½" wide copper 
foil tape, for each antenna, which means you need 
two "kits", one for the corrm. antenna and one for 
the Nav. antenna. 
The Nav. antenna should be installed under the canard 
(on the bottom skin, after the canard is glassed). 
The 48" (approx) length of copper tape should be cut 
into two equal lengths, these two pieces should be 
stuck to the bottom skin in a 'V' shape, with the 
open end of the 'V' facing forward (see sketch). The 
center of the 'V' is treated as per the photo B and 
sketch. Strip your RG-58U coax, and place four torroids over the unstripped coax per photo A . Note that 
the torroids are spaced approximately one torroid 
width apart. The torroids may be epoxied into place, 
or you may use shrink tubing as shown in photo B . 
The two copper foil elements must be connected to 
the coax cable as shown in photo B , by means of 
two short 􀀐,ires, soldered to the coax terminal strip 
(supplied), and to the copper foil elements. A protective ply of BID may be layed up over the copper foil elements, peel ply for a good transition. 
The Comm. antenna is exactly the same, and it is mounted on the bottom of the main gear strut. Mount the coax 
terminal strip as near to one side of the fuselage, 
(where the gear exits the fuselage), as possible. 
This ensures that one copper foil element extends 
out of the fuselage and down one leg, with as much 
vertical orientation as possible. the center conductor 
of the coax must be connected to this copper foil 
element. The other element will go through the fuselage, over each gear attach tab, and must be connected to 
the coax shield. You may apply a narrow strip of 
BID over the copper foil for protection and again, 
peel ply it for smooth transition. This completes 
the antenna installation. 
